--- Page 27 ---
PARIS AGREEMENT
The Parties to this Agreement,
Being Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, hereinafter referred to as "the Convention",
Pursuant to the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action established by
decision 1/CP.17 of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its
seventeenth session,
In pursuit of the objective of the Convention, and being guided by its
principles, including the principle of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national
circumstances,
Recognizing the need for an effective and progressive response to the
urgent threat of climate change on the basis of the best available scientific
knowledge,
Also recognizing the specific needs and special circumstances of
developing country Parties, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the
adverse effects of climate change, as provided for in the Convention,
Taking full account of the specific needs and special situations of the least
developed countries with regard to funding and transfer of technology,
Recognizing that Parties may be affected not only by climate change, but
also by the impacts of the measures taken in response to it,
Emphasizing the intrinsic relationship that climate change actions,
responses and impacts have with equitable access to sustainable development and
eradication of poverty,
Recognizing the fundamental priority of safeguarding food security and
ending hunger, and the particular vulnerabilities of food production systems to the
adverse impacts of climate change,

--- Page 28 ---
Taking into account the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and
the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined
development priorities,
Acknowledging that climate change is a common concern of humankind,
Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote and
consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights
of indigenous peoples, local communities, migrants, children, persons with
disabilities and people in vulnerable situations and the right to development, as
well as gender equality, empowerment of women and intergenerational equity,
Recognizing the importance of the conservation and enhancement, as
appropriate, of sinks and reservoirs of the greenhouse gases referred to in the
Convention,
Noting the importance of ensuring the integrity of all ecosystems, including
oceans, and the protection of biodiversity, recognized by some cultures as Mother
Earth, and noting the importance for some of the concept of "climate justice",
when taking action to address climate change,
Affirming the importance of education, training, public awareness, public
participation, public access to information and cooperation at all levels on the
matters addressed in this Agreement,
Recognizing the importance of the engagements of all levels of government
and various actors, in accordance with respective national legislations of Parties, in
addressing climate change,
Also recognizing that sustainable lifestyles and sustainable patterns of
consumption and production, with developed country Parties taking the lead, play
an important role in addressing climate change,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
For the purpose of this Agreement, the definitions contained in Article 1 of
the Convention shall apply. In addition:
- 2-

--- Page 29 ---
(a) "Convention" means the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, adopted in New York on 9 May 1992;
(b) "Conference of the Parties" means the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention;
(c) "Party" means a Party to this Agreement.
Article 2
1. This Agreement, in enhancing the implementation of the Convention,
including its objective, aims to strengthen the global response to the threat of
climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate
poverty, including by:
(a) Holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below
2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would
significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change;
(b) Increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate
change and foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions
development, in a manner that does not threaten food production; and
(c) Making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low
greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development.
2. This Agreement will be implemented to reflect equity and the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light
of different national circumstances.
Article 3
As nationally determined contributions to the global response to climate
change, all Parties are to undertake and communicate ambitious efforts as defined
in Articles 4, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 13 with the view to achieving the purpose of this
Agreement as set out in Article 2. The efforts of all Parties will represent a
progression over time, while recognizing the need to support developing country
Parties for the effective implementation of this Agreement.
- 3-

--- Page 30 ---
Article 23
1. In order to achieve the long-term temperature goal set out in Article 2,
Parties aim to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as
possible, recognizing that peaking will take longer for developing country Parties,
and to undertake rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with best available
science, so as to achieve a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources
and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases in the second half of this century, on the
basis of equity, and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to
eradicate poverty.
2. Each Party shall prepare, communicate and maintain successive nationally
determined contributions that it intends to achieve. Parties shall pursue domestic
mitigation measures, with the aim of achieving the objectives of such
contributions.
3. Each Party's successive nationally determined contribution will represent a
progression beyond the Party's then current nationally determined contribution and
reflect its highest possible ambition, reflecting its common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national
circumstances.
4. Developed country Parties should continue taking the lead by undertaking
economy-wide absolute emission reduction targets. Developing country Parties
should continue enhancing their mitigation efforts, and are encouraged to move
over time towards economy-wide emission reduction or limitation targets in the
light of different national circumstances.
5. Support shall be provided to developing country Parties for the
implementation of this Article, in accordance with Articles 9, 10 and 11,
recognizing that enhanced support for developing country Parties will allow for
higher ambition in their actions.
6. The least developed countries and small island developing States may
prepare and communicate strategies, plans and actions for low greenhouse gas
emissions development reflecting their special circumstances.
7. Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties' adaptation actions and/or
economic diversification plans can contribute to mitigation outcomes under this
Article.
- 4-

--- Page 31 ---
8. In communicating their nationally determined contributions, all Parties shall
provide the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding in
accordance with decision 1/CP.21 and any relevant decisions of the Conference of
the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
9. Each Party shall communicate a nationally determined contribution every
five years in accordance with decision 1/CP21 and any relevant decisions of the
Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement
and be informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake referred to in Article 14.
10. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall consider common time frames for nationally determined
contributions at its first session.
11. A Party may at any time adjust its existing nationally determined
contribution with a view to enhancing its level of ambition, in accordance with
guidance adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the
Parties to this Agreement.
12. Nationally determined contributions communicated by Parties shall be
recorded in a public registry maintained by the secretariat.
13. Parties shall account for their nationally determined contributions. In
accounting for anthropogenic emissions and removals corresponding to their
nationally determined contributions, Parties shall promote environmental integrity,
transparency, accuracy, completeness, comparability and consistency, and ensure
the avoidance of double counting, in accordance with guidance adopted by the
Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
14. In the context of their nationally determined contributions, when recognizing
and implementing mitigation actions with respect to anthropogenic emissions and
removals, Parties should take into account, as appropriate, existing methods and
guidance under the Convention, in the light of the provisions of paragraph 13 of
this Article.
15. Parties shall take into consideration in the implementation of this Agreement
the concerns of Parties with economies most affected by the impacts of response
measures, particularly developing country Parties.
- 5-

--- Page 32 ---
16. Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their
member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under paragraph 2 of
this Article shall notify the secretariat of the terms of that agreement, including the
emission level allocated to each Party within the relevant time period, when they
communicate their nationally determined contributions. The secretariat shall in turn
inform the Parties and signatories to the Convention of the terms of that agreement.
17. Each party to such an agreement shall be responsible for its emission level as
set out in the agreement referred to in paragraph 16 of this Article in accordance
with paragraphs 13 and 14 of this Article and Articles 13 and 15.
18. If Parties acting jointly do so in the framework of, and together with, a
regional economic integration organization which is itself a Party to this
Agreement, each member State of that regional economic integration organization
individually, and together with the regional economic integration organization,
shall be responsible for its emission level as set out in the agreement
communicated under paragraph 16 of this Article in accordance with paragraphs 13
and 14 of this Article and Articles 13 and 15.
19. All Parties should strive to formulate and communicate long-term low
greenhouse gas emission development strategies, mindful of Article 2 taking into
account their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities,
in the light of different national circumstances.
Article 5
1. Parties should take action to conserve and enhance, as appropriate, sinks and
reservoirs of greenhouse gases as referred to in Article 4, paragraph 1 (d), of the
Convention, including forests.
2. Parties are encouraged to take action to implement and support, including
through results-based payments, the existing framework as set out in related
guidance and decisions already agreed under the Convention for: policy approaches
and positive incentives for activities relating to reducing emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation, and the role of conservation, sustainable
management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing
countries; and alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and
adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests,
while reaffirming the importance of incentivizing, as appropriate, non-carbon
benefits associated with such approaches.
- 6-

--- Page 33 ---
Article 23
1. Parties recognize that some Parties choose to pursue voluntary cooperation
in the implementation of their nationally determined contributions to allow for
higher ambition in their mitigation and adaptation actions and to promote
sustainable development and environmental integrity.
2. Parties shall, where engaging on a voluntary basis in cooperative approaches
that involve the use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes towards
nationally determined contributions, promote sustainable development and ensure
environmental integrity and transparency, including in governance, and shall apply
robust accounting to ensure, inter alia, the avoidance of double counting, consistent
with guidance adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of
the Parties to this Agreement.
3. The use of internationally transferred mitigation outcomes to achieve
nationally determined contributions under this Agreement shall be voluntary and
authorized by participating Parties.
4. A mechanism to contribute to the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions
and support sustainable development is hereby established under the authority and
guidance of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to
this Agreement for use by Parties on a voluntary basis. It shall be supervised by a
body designated by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the
Parties to this Agreement, and shall aim:
(a) To promote the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions while
fostering sustainable development;
(b) To incentivize and facilitate participation in the mitigation of
greenhouse gas emissions by public and private entities authorized by a Party;
(c) To contribute to the reduction of emission levels in the host Party,
which will benefit from mitigation activities resulting in emission reductions that
can also be used by another Party to fulfil its nationally determined contribution;
and
(d) To deliver an overall mitigation in global emissions.
- 7-

--- Page 34 ---
5. Emission reductions resulting from the mechanism referred to in paragraph 4
of this Article shall not be used to demonstrate achievement of the host Party's
nationally determined contribution if used by another Party to demonstrate
achievement of its nationally determined contribution.
6. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall ensure that a share of the proceeds from activities under the
mechanism referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article is used to cover administrative
expenses as well as to assist developing country Parties that are particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change to meet the costs of adaptation.
7. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall adopt rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism referred
to in paragraph 4 of this Article at its first session.
8. Parties recognize the importance of integrated, holistic and balanced
non-market approaches being available to Parties to assist in the implementation of
their nationally determined contributions, in the context of sustainable development
and poverty eradication, in a coordinated and effective manner, including through,
inter alia, mitigation, adaptation, finance, technology transfer and capacity-
building, as appropriate. These approaches shall aim to:
(a) Promote mitigation and adaptation ambition;
(b) Enhance public and private sector participation in the implementation
of nationally determined contributions; and
(c) Enable opportunities for coordination across instruments and relevant
institutional arrangements.
9. A framework for non-market approaches to sustainable development is
hereby defined to promote the non-market approaches referred to in paragraph 8 of
this Article.
- 8-

--- Page 35 ---
Article 23
1. Parties hereby establish the global goal on adaptation of enhancing adaptive
capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change,
with a view to contributing to sustainable development and ensuring an adequate
adaptation response in the context of the temperature goal referred to in Article 2.
2. Parties recognize that adaptation is a global challenge faced by all with local,
subnational, national, regional and international dimensions, and that it is a key
component of and makes a contribution to the long-term global response to climate
change to protect people, livelihoods and ecosystems, taking into account the
urgent and immediate needs of those developing country Parties that are
particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
3. The adaptation efforts of developing country Parties shall be recognized, in
accordance with the modalities to be adopted by the Conference of the Parties
serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement at its first session.
4. Parties recognize that the current need for adaptation is significant and that
greater levels of mitigation can reduce the need for additional adaptation efforts,
and that greater adaptation needs can involve greater adaptation costs.
5. Parties acknowledge that adaptation action should follow a country-driven,
gender-responsive, participatory and fully transparent approach, taking into
consideration vulnerable groups, communities and ecosystems, and should be
based on and guided by the best available science and, as appropriate, traditional
knowledge, knowledge of indigenous peoples and local knowledge systems, with a
view to integrating adaptation into relevant socioeconomic and environmental
policies and actions, where appropriate.
6. Parties recognize the importance of support for and international cooperation
on adaptation efforts and the importance of taking into account the needs of
developing country Parties, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the
adverse effects of climate change.
7. Parties should strengthen their cooperation on enhancing action on
adaptation, taking into account the Cancun Adaptation Framework, including with
regard to:
- 9-

--- Page 36 ---
(a) Sharing information, good practices, experiences and lessons learned,
including, as appropriate, as these relate to science, planning, policies and
implementation in relation to adaptation actions;
(b) Strengthening institutional arrangements, including those under the
Convention that serve this Agreement, to support the synthesis of relevant
information and knowledge, and the provision of technical support and guidance to
Parties;
(c) Strengthening scientific knowledge on climate, including research,
systematic observation of the climate system and early warning systems, in a
manner that informs climate services and supports decision-making;
(d) Assisting developing country Parties in identifying effective
adaptation practices, adaptation needs, priorities, support provided and received for
adaptation actions and efforts, and challenges and gaps, in a manner consistent with
encouraging good practices; and
(e) Improving the effectiveness and durability of adaptation actions.
8. United Nations specialized organizations and agencies are encouraged to
support the efforts of Parties to implement the actions referred to in paragraph 7 of
this Article, taking into account the provisions of paragraph 5 of this Article.
9. Each Party shall, as appropriate, engage in adaptation planning processes
and the implementation of actions, including the development or enhancement of
relevant plans, policies and/or contributions, which may include:
(a) The implementation of adaptation actions, undertakings and/or efforts;
(b) The process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans;
(c) The assessment of climate change impacts and vulnerability, with a
view to formulating nationally determined prioritized actions, taking into account
vulnerable people, places and ecosystems;
(d) Monitoring and evaluating and learning from adaptation plans,
policies, programmes and actions; and
-10-

--- Page 37 ---
(e) Building the resilience of socioeconomic and ecological systems,
including through economic diversification and sustainable management of natural
resources.
10. Each Party should, as appropriate, submit and update periodically an
adaptation communication, which may include its priorities, implementation and
support needs, plans and actions, without creating any additional burden for
developing country Parties.
11. The adaptation communication referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article
shall be, as appropriate, submitted and updated periodically, as a component of or
in conjunction with other communications or documents, including a national
adaptation plan, a nationally determined contribution as referred to in Article 4,
paragraph 2, and/or a national communication.
12. The adaptation communications referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article
shall be recorded in a public registry maintained by the secretariat.
13. Continuous and enhanced international support shall be provided to
developing country Parties for the implementation of paragraphs 7, 9, 10 and 11 of
this Article, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 9, 10 and 11.
14. The global stocktake referred to in Article 14 shall, inter alia:
(a) Recognize adaptation efforts of developing country Parties;
(b) Enhance the implementation of adaptation action taking into account
the adaptation communication referred to in paragraph 10 of this Article;
(c) Review the adequacy and effectiveness of adaptation and support
provided for adaptation; and
(d) Review the overall progress made in achieving the global goal on
adaptation referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.

--- Page 38 ---
Article 8
1. Parties recognize the importance of averting, minimizing and addressing loss
and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including
extreme weather events and slow onset events, and the role of sustainable
development in reducing the risk of loss and damage.
2. The Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with
Climate Change Impacts shall be subject to the authority and guidance of the
Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement
and may be enhanced and strengthened, as determined by the Conference of the
Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
3. Parties should enhance understanding, action and support, including through
the Warsaw International Mechanism, as appropriate, on a cooperative and
facilitative basis with respect to loss and damage associated with the adverse
effects of climate change.
4. Accordingly, areas of cooperation and facilitation to enhance understanding,
action and support may include:
(a) Early warning systems;
(b) Emergency preparedness;
(c) Slow onset events;
(d) Events that may involve irreversible and permanent loss and damage;
(e) Comprehensive risk assessment and management;
(f) Risk insurance facilities, climate risk pooling and other insurance
solutions;
(g) Non-economic losses; and
(h) Resilience of communities, livelihoods and ecosystems.
-12-

--- Page 39 ---
5. The Warsaw International Mechanism shall collaborate with existing bodies
and expert groups under the Agreement, as well as relevant organizations and
expert bodies outside the Agreement.
Article 9
1. Developed country Parties shall provide financial resources to assist
developing country Parties with respect to both mitigation and adaptation in
continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention.
2. Other Parties are encouraged to provide or continue to provide such support
voluntarily.
3. As part of a global effort, developed country Parties should continue to take
the lead in mobilizing climate finance from a wide variety of sources, instruments
and channels, noting the significant role of public funds, through a variety of
actions, including supporting country-driven strategies, and taking into account the
needs and priorities of developing country Parties. Such mobilization of climate
finance should represent a progression beyond previous efforts.
4. The provision of scaled-up financial resources should aim to achieve a
balance between adaptation and mitigation, taking into account country-driven
strategies, and the priorities and needs of developing country Parties, especially
those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and
have significant capacity constraints, such as the least developed countries and
small island developing States, considering the need for public and grant-based
resources for adaptation.
5. Developed country Parties shall biennially communicate indicative
quantitative and qualitative information related to paragraphs 1 and 3 of this
Article, as applicable, including, as available, projected levels of public financial
resources to be provided to developing country Parties. Other Parties providing
resources are encouraged to communicate biennially such information on a
voluntary basis.
6. The global stocktake referred to in Article 14 shall take into account the
relevant information provided by developed country Parties and/or Agreement
bodies on efforts related to climate finance.
-13-

--- Page 40 ---
7. Developed country Parties shall provide transparent and consistent
information on support for developing country Parties provided and mobilized
through public interventions biennially in accordance with the modalities,
procedures and guidelines to be adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as
the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement, at its first session, as stipulated in
Article 13, paragraph 13. Other Parties are encouraged to do so.
8. The Financial Mechanism of the Convention, including its operating entities,
shall serve as the financial mechanism of this Agreement.
9. The institutions serving this Agreement, including the operating entities of
the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, shall aim to ensure efficient access to
financial resources through simplified approval procedures and enhanced readiness
support for developing country Parties, in particular for the least developed
countries and small island developing States, in the context of their national
climate strategies and plans.
Article 10
1. Parties share a long-term vision on the importance of fully realizing
technology development and transfer in order to improve resilience to climate
change and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
2. Parties, noting the importance of technology for the implementation of
mitigation and adaptation actions under this Agreement and recognizing existing
technology deployment and dissemination efforts, shall strengthen cooperative
action on technology development and transfer.
3. The Technology Mechanism established under the Convention shall serve
this Agreement.
4. A technology framework is hereby established to provide overarching
guidance to the work of the Technology Mechanism in promoting and facilitating
enhanced action on technology development and transfer in order to support the
implementation of this Agreement, in pursuit of the long-term vision referred to in
paragraph 1 of this Article.
-14-

--- Page 41 ---
5. Accelerating, encouraging and enabling innovation is critical for an
effective, long-term global response to climate change and promoting economic
growth and sustainable development. Such effort shall be, as appropriate,
supported, including by the Technology Mechanism and, through financial means,
by the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, for collaborative approaches to
research and development, and facilitating access to technology, in particular for
early stages of the technology cycle, to developing country Parties.
6. Support, including financial support, shall be provided to developing country
Parties for the implementation of this Article, including for strengthening
cooperative action on technology development and transfer at different stages of
the technology cycle, with a view to achieving a balance between support for
mitigation and adaptation. The global stocktake referred to in Article 14 shall take
into account available information on efforts related to support on technology
development and transfer for developing country Parties.
Article 11
1. Capacity-building under this Agreement should enhance the capacity and
ability of developing country Parties, in particular countries with the least capacity,
such as the least developed countries, and those that are particularly vulnerable to
the adverse effects of climate change, such as small island developing States, to
take effective climate change action, including, inter alia, to implement adaptation
and mitigation actions, and should facilitate technology development,
dissemination and deployment, access to climate finance, relevant aspects of
education, training and public awareness, and the transparent, timely and accurate
communication of information.
2. Capacity-building should be country-driven, based on and responsive to
national needs, and foster country ownership of Parties, in particular, for
developing country Parties, including at the national, subnational and local levels.
Capacity-building should be guided by lessons learned, including those from
capacity-building activities under the Convention, and should be an effective,
iterative process that is participatory, cross-cutting and gender-responsive.
3. All Parties should cooperate to enhance the capacity of developing country
Parties to implement this Agreement. Developed country Parties should enhance
support for capacity-building actions in developing country Parties.
-15-

--- Page 42 ---
4. All Parties enhancing the capacity of developing country Parties to
implement this Agreement, including through regional, bilateral and multilateral
approaches, shall regularly communicate on these actions or measures on capacity-
building. Developing country Parties should regularly communicate progress made
on implementing capacity-building plans, policies, actions or measures to
implement this Agreement.
5. Capacity-building activities shall be enhanced through appropriate
institutional arrangements to support the implementation of this Agreement,
including the appropriate institutional arrangements established under the
Convention that serve this Agreement. The Conference of the Parties serving as the
meeting of the Parties to this Agreement shall, at its first session, consider and
adopt a decision on the initial institutional arrangements for capacity-building.
Article 12
Parties shall cooperate in taking measures, as appropriate, to enhance climate
change education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access
to information, recognizing the importance of these steps with respect to enhancing
actions under this Agreement.
Article 13
1. In order to build mutual trust and confidence and to promote effective
implementation, an enhanced transparency framework for action and support, with
built-in flexibility which takes into account Parties' different capacities and builds
upon collective experience is hereby established.
2. The transparency framework shall provide flexibility in the implementation
of the provisions of this Article to those developing country Parties that need it in
the light of their capacities. The modalities, procedures and guidelines referred to
in paragraph 13 of this Article shall reflect such flexibility.
3. The transparency framework shall build on and enhance the transparency
arrangements under the Convention, recognizing the special circumstances of the
least developed countries and small island developing States, and be implemented
in a facilitative, non-intrusive, non-punitive manner, respectful of national
sovereignty, and avoid placing undue burden on Parties.
-16-

--- Page 43 ---
4. The transparency arrangements under the Convention, including national
communications, biennial reports and biennial update reports, international
assessment and review and international consultation and analysis, shall form part
of the experience drawn upon for the development of the modalities, procedures
and guidelines under paragraph 13 of this Article.
5. The purpose of the framework for transparency of action is to provide a clear
understanding of climate change action in the light of the objective of the
Convention as set out in its Article 2, including clarity and tracking of progress
towards achieving Parties' individual nationally determined contributions under
Article 4, and Parties' adaptation actions under Article 7, including good practices,
priorities, needs and gaps, to inform the global stocktake under Article 14.
6. The purpose of the framework for transparency of support is to provide
clarity on support provided and received by relevant individual Parties in the
context of climate change actions under Articles 4, 7, 9, 10 and 11, and, to the
extent possible, to provide a full overview of aggregate financial support provided,
to inform the global stocktake under Article 14.
7. Each Party shall regularly provide the following information:
(a) A national inventory report of anthropogenic emissions by sources and
removals by sinks of greenhouse gases, prepared using good practice
methodologies accepted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and
agreed upon by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties
to this Agreement; and
(b) Information necessary to track progress made in implementing and
achieving its nationally determined contribution under Article 4.
8. Each Party should also provide information related to climate change
impacts and adaptation under Article 7, as appropriate.
9. Developed country Parties shall, and other Parties that provide support
should, provide information on financial, technology transfer and capacity-building
support provided to developing country Parties under Articles 9, 10 and 11.

--- Page 44 ---
10. Developing country Parties should provide information on financial,
technology transfer and capacity-building support needed and received under
Articles 9, 10 and 11.
11. Information submitted by each Party under paragraphs 7 and 9 of this Article
shall undergo a technical expert review, in accordance with decision 1/CP.21. For
those developing country Parties that need it in the light of their capacities, the
review process shall include assistance in identifying capacity-building needs. In
addition, each Party shall participate in a facilitative, multilateral consideration of
progress with respect to efforts under Article 9, and its respective implementation
and achievement of its nationally determined contribution.
12. The technical expert review under this paragraph shall consist of a
consideration of the Party's support provided, as relevant, and its implementation
and achievement of its nationally determined contribution. The review shall also
identify areas of improvement for the Party, and include a review of the
consistency of the information with the modalities, procedures and guidelines
referred to in paragraph 13 of this Article, taking into account the flexibility
accorded to the Party under paragraph 2 of this Article. The review shall pay
particular attention to the respective national capabilities and circumstances of
developing country Parties.
13. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall, at its first session, building on experience from the arrangements
related to transparency under the Convention, and elaborating on the provisions in
this Article, adopt common modalities, procedures and guidelines, as appropriate,
for the transparency of action and support.
14. Support shall be provided to developing countries for the implementation of
this Article.
15. Support shall also be provided for the building of transparency-related
capacity of developing country Parties on a continuous basis.
Article 14
1. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall periodically take stock of the implementation of this Agreement to
assess the collective progress towards achieving the purpose of this Agreement and
its long-term goals (referred to as the "global stocktake"). It shall do so in a
comprehensive and facilitative manner, considering mitigation, adaptation and the
-18-

--- Page 45 ---
means of implementation and support, and in the light of equity and the best
available science.
2. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall undertake its first global stocktake in 2023 and every five years
thereafter unless otherwise decided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the
meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
3. The outcome of the global stocktake shall inform Parties in updating and
enhancing, in a nationally determined manner, their actions and support in
accordance with the relevant provisions of this Agreement, as well as in enhancing
international cooperation for climate action.
Article 15
1. A mechanism to facilitate implementation of and promote compliance with
the provisions of this Agreement is hereby established.
2. The mechanism referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall consist of a
committee that shall be expert-based and facilitative in nature and function in a
manner that is transparent, non-adversarial and non-punitive. The committee shall
pay particular attention to the respective national capabilities and circumstances of
Parties.
3. The committee shall operate under the modalities and procedures adopted by
the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement at its first session and report annually to the Conference of the Parties
serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
Article 16
1. The Conference of the Parties, the supreme body of the Convention, shall
serve as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
2. Parties to the Convention that are not Parties to this Agreement may
participate as observers in the proceedings of any session of the Conference of the
Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement. When the
Conference of the Parties serves as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement,
decisions under this Agreement shall be taken only by those that are Parties to this
Agreement.
-19-

--- Page 46 ---
3. When the Conference of the Parties serves as the meeting of the Parties to
this Agreement, any member of the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties
representing a Party to the Convention but, at that time, not a Party to this
Agreement, shall be replaced by an additional member to be elected by and from
amongst the Parties to this Agreement.
4. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement shall keep under regular review the implementation of this Agreement
and shall make, within its mandate, the decisions necessary to promote its effective
implementation. It shall perform the functions assigned to it by this Agreement and
shall:
(a) Establish such subsidiary bodies as deemed necessary for the
implementation of this Agreement; and
(b) Exercise such other functions as may be required for the
implementation of this Agreement.
5. The rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties and the financial
procedures applied under the Convention shall be applied mutatis mutandis under
this Agreement, except as may be otherwise decided by consensus by the
Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement.
6. The first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of
the Parties to this Agreement shall be convened by the secretariat in conjunction
with the first session of the Conference of the Parties that is scheduled after the
date of entry into force of this Agreement. Subsequent ordinary sessions of the
Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement
shall be held in conjunction with ordinary sessions of the Conference of the Parties,
unless otherwise decided by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of
the Parties to this Agreement.
7. Extraordinary sessions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the
meeting of the Parties to this Agreement shall be held at such other times as may be
deemed necessary by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the
Parties to this Agreement or at the written request of any Party, provided that,
within six months of the request being communicated to the Parties by the
secretariat, it is supported by at least one third of the Parties.
-20-

--- Page 47 ---
8. The United Nations and its specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, as well as any State member thereof or observers thereto not party
to the Convention, may be represented at sessions of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement as observers. Any body or
agency, whether national or international, governmental or non-governmental,
which is qualified in matters covered by this Agreement and which has informed
the secretariat of its wish to be represented at a session of the Conference of the
Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this Agreement as an observer, may
be so admitted unless at least one third of the Parties present object. The admission
and participation of observers shall be subject to the rules of procedure referred to
in paragraph 5 of this Article.
Article 17
1. The secretariat established by Article 8 of the Convention shall serve as the
secretariat of this Agreement.
2. Article 8, paragraph 2, of the Convention on the functions of the secretariat,
and Article 8, paragraph 3, of the Convention, on the arrangements made for the
functioning of the secretariat, shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Agreement. The
secretariat shall, in addition, exercise the functions assigned to it under this
Agreement and by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the
Parties to this Agreement.
Article 18
1. The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the
Subsidiary Body for Implementation established by Articles 9 and 10 of the
Convention shall serve, respectively, as the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and
Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation of this
Agreement. The provisions of the Convention relating to the functioning of these
two bodies shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Agreement. Sessions of the
meetings of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the
Subsidiary Body for Implementation of this Agreement shall be held in conjunction
with the meetings of, respectively, the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and
Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation of the
Convention.
-21-

--- Page 48 ---
2. Parties to the Convention that are not Parties to this Agreement may
participate as observers in the proceedings of any session of the subsidiary bodies.
When the subsidiary bodies serve as the subsidiary bodies of this Agreement,
decisions under this Agreement shall be taken only by those that are Parties to this
Agreement.
3. When the subsidiary bodies established by Articles 9 and 10 of the
Convention exercise their functions with regard to matters concerning this
Agreement, any member of the bureaux of those subsidiary bodies representing a
Party to the Convention but, at that time, not a Party to this Agreement, shall be
replaced by an additional member to be elected by and from amongst the Parties to
this Agreement.
Article 19
1. Subsidiary bodies or other institutional arrangements established by or under
the Convention, other than those referred to in this Agreement, shall serve this
Agreement upon a decision of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting
of the Parties to this Agreement. The Conference of the Parties serving as the
meeting of the Parties to this Agreement shall specify the functions to be exercised
by such subsidiary bodies or arrangements.
2. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to this
Agreement may provide further guidance to such subsidiary bodies and
institutional arrangements.
Article 20
1. This Agreement shall be open for signature and subject to ratification,
acceptance or approval by States and regional economic integration organizations
that are Parties to the Convention. It shall be open for signature at the United
Nations Headquarters in New York from 22 April 2016 to 21 April 2017.
Thereafter, this Agreement shall be open for accession from the day following the
date on which it is closed for signature. Instruments of ratification, acceptance,
approval or accession shall be deposited with the Depositary.
2. Any regional economic integration organization that becomes a Party to this
Agreement without any of its member States being a Party shall be bound by all the
obligations under this Agreement. In the case of regional economic integration
organizations with one or more member States that are Parties to this Agreement,
-22-

--- Page 49 ---
the organization and its member States shall decide on their respective
responsibilities for the performance of their obligations under this Agreement. In
such cases, the organization and the member States shall not be entitled to exercise
rights under this Agreement concurrently.
3. In their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession,
regional economic integration organizations shall declare the extent of their
competence with respect to the matters governed by this Agreement. These
organizations shall also inform the Depositary, who shall in turn inform the Parties,
of any substantial modification in the extent of their competence.
Article 21
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date on
which at least 55 Parties to the Convention accounting in total for at least an
estimated 55 per cent of the total global greenhouse gas emissions have deposited
their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
2. Solely for the limited purpose of paragraph 1 of this Article, "total global
greenhouse gas emissions" means the most up-to-date amount communicated on or
before the date of adoption of this Agreement by the Parties to the Convention.
3. For each State or regional economic integration organization that ratifies,
accepts or approves this Agreement or accedes thereto after the conditions set out
in paragraph 1 of this Article for entry into force have been fulfilled, this
Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the date of deposit by
such State or regional economic integration organization of its instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Article, any instrument deposited by
a regional economic integration organization shall not be counted as additional to
those deposited by its member States.
Article 22
The provisions of Article 15 of the Convention on the adoption of
amendments to the Convention shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Agreement.
-23-

--- Page 50 ---
Article 23
1. The provisions of Article 16 of the Convention on the adoption and
amendment of annexes to the Convention shall apply mutatis mutandis to this
Agreement.
2. Annexes to this Agreement shall form an integral part thereof and, unless
otherwise expressly provided for, a reference to this Agreement constitutes at the
same time a reference to any annexes thereto. Such annexes shall be restricted to
lists, forms and any other material of a descriptive nature that is of a scientific,
technical, procedural or administrative character.
Article 24
The provisions of Article 14 of the Convention on settlement of disputes
shall apply mutatis mutandis to this Agreement.
Article 25
1. Each Party shall have one vote, except as provided for in paragraph 2 of this
Article.
2. Regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their
competence, shall exercise their right to vote with a number of votes equal to the
number of their member States that are Parties to this Agreement. Such an
organization shall not exercise its right to vote if any of its member States exercises
its right, and vice versa.
Article 26
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the Depositary of this
Agreement.
Article 27
No reservations may be made to this Agreement.
-24-

--- Page 51 ---
Article 23
1. At any time after three years from the date on which this Agreement has
entered into force for a Party, that Party may withdraw from this Agreement by
giving written notification to the Depositary.
2. Any such withdrawal shall take effect upon expiry of one year from the date
of receipt by the Depositary of the notification of withdrawal, or on such later date
as may be specified in the notification of withdrawal.
3. Any Party that withdraws from the Convention shall be considered as also
having withdrawn from this Agreement.
Article 29
The original of this Agreement, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
DONE at Paris this twelfth day of December two thousand and fifteen.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized to that effect,
have signed this Agreement.
-25-

--- Page 55 ---
ACCORD DE PARIS
Les Parties au présent Accord,
Étant Parties à la Convention-cadre des Nations Unies sur les changements
climatiques, ci-après dénommée « la Convention »,
Agissant en application de la plateforme de Durban pour une action
renforcée adoptée par la décision 1/CP.17 de la Conférence des Parties à la
Convention à sa dix-septième session,
Soucieuses d'atteindre l'objectif de la Convention, et guidées par ses
principes, y compris le principe de l'équité et des responsabilités communes mais
différenciées et des capacités respectives, eu égard aux différentes situations
nationales,
Reconnaissant la nécessité d'une riposte efficace et progressive à la menace
pressante des changements climatiques en se fondant sur les meilleures
connaissances scientifiques disponibles,
Reconnaissant aussi les besoins spécifiques et la situation particulière des
pays en développement Parties, surtout de ceux qui sont particulièrement
vulnérables aux effets néfastes des changements climatiques, comme le prévoit la
Convention,
Tenant pleinement compte des besoins spécifiques et de la situation
particulière des pays les moins avancés en ce qui concerne le financement et le
transfert de technologies,
Reconnaissant que les Parties peuvent être touchées non seulement par les
changements climatiques, mais aussi par les effets des mesures de riposte à ces
changements,
Soulignant que l'action et la riposte face aux changements climatiques et
les effets des changements climatiques sont intrinsèquement liés à un accès
équitable au développement durable et à l'élimination de la pauvreté,

--- Page 56 ---
Reconnaissant la priorité fondamentale consistant à protéger la sécurité
alimentaire et à venir à bout de la faim, et la vulnérabilité particulière des systèmes
de production alimentaire aux effets néfastes des changements climatiques,
Tenant compte des impératifs d'une transition juste pour la population active
et de la création d'emplois décents et de qualité conformément aux priorités de
développement définies au niveau national,
Conscientes que les changements climatiques sont un sujet de préoccupation
pour l'humanité tout entière et que, lorsqu'elles prennent des mesures face à ces
changements, les Parties devraient respecter, promouvoir et prendre en
considération leurs obligations respectives concernant les droits de l'Homme, le
droit à la santé, les droits des peuples autochtones, des communautés locales, des
migrants, des enfants, des personnes handicapées et des personnes en situation
vulnérable et le droit au développement, ainsi que l'égalité des sexes,
l'autonomisation des femmes et l'équité entre les générations,
Reconnaissant l'importance de la conservation et, le cas échéant, du
renforcement des puits et réservoirs des gaz à effet de serre visés dans la
Convention,
Notant qu'il importe de veiller à l'intégrité de tous les écosystèmes, y
compris les océans, et à la protection de la biodiversité, reconnue par certaines
cultures comme la Terre nourricière, et notant l'importance pour certains de la
notion de «justice climatique», dans l'action menée face aux changements
climatiques,
Affirmant l'importance de l'éducation, de la formation, de la sensibilisation,
de la participation du public, de l'accès de la population à l'information et de la
coopération à tous les niveaux sur les questions traitées dans le présent Accord,
Reconnaissant l'importance de la participation des pouvoirs publics à tous
les niveaux et des divers acteurs, conformément aux législations nationales
respectives des Parties, dans la lutte contre les changements climatiques,
Reconnaissant également que des modes de vie durables et des modes
durables de consommation et de production, les pays développés Parties montrant
la voie, jouent un rôle important pour faire face aux changements climatiques,
Sont convenues de ce qui suit :
- 2-

--- Page 57 ---
Article premier
Aux fins du présent Accord, les définitions énoncées à l'article premier de la
Convention sont applicables. En outre :
a) On entend par « Convention » la Convention-cadre des Nations Unies
sur les changements climatiques, adoptée à New York le 9 mai 1992;
b) On entend par « Conférence des Parties » la Conférence des Parties à
la Convention;
c) On entend par « Partie » une Partie au présent Accord.
Article 2
1. Le présent Accord, en contribuant à la mise en œuvre de la Convention,
notamment de son objectif, vise à renforcer la riposte mondiale à la menace des
changements climatiques, dans le contexte du développement durable et de la lutte
contre la pauvreté, notamment en :
a) Contenant l'élévation de la température moyenne de la planète
nettement en dessous de 2 °C par rapport aux niveaux préindustriels et en
poursuivant l'action menée pour limiter l'élévation de la température à 1,5 °C par
rapport aux niveaux préindustriels, étant entendu que cela réduirait sensiblement
les risques et les effets des changements climatiques;
b) Renforçant les capacités d'adaptation aux effets néfastes des
changements climatiques et en promouvant la résilience à ces changements et un
développement à faible émission de gaz à effet de serre, d'une manière qui ne
menace pas la production alimentaire;
c) Rendant les flux financiers compatibles avec un profil d'évolution
vers un développement à faible émission de gaz à effet de serre et résilient aux
changements climatiques.
2. Le présent Accord sera appliqué conformément à l'équité et au principe des
responsabilités communes mais différenciées et des capacités respectives, eu égard
aux différentes situations nationales.
- 3-

--- Page 58 ---
Article 20
À titre de contributions déterminées au niveau national à la riposte mondiale
aux changements climatiques, il incombe à toutes les Parties d'engager et de
communiquer des efforts ambitieux au sens des articles 4, 7, 9, 10, 11 et 13 en vue
de réaliser l'objet du présent Accord tel qu'énoncé à l'article 2. Les efforts de
toutes les Parties représenteront une progression dans le temps, tout en
reconnaissant la nécessité d'aider les pays en développement Parties pour que le
présent Accord soit appliqué efficacement.
Article 4
1. En vue d'atteindre l'objectif de température à long terme énoncé à
l'article 2, les Parties cherchent à parvenir au plafonnement mondial des émissions
de gaz à effet de serre dans les meilleurs délais, étant entendu que le plafonnement
prendra davantage de temps pour les pays en développement Parties, et à opérer
des réductions rapidement par la suite conformément aux meilleures données
scientifiques disponibles de façon à parvenir à un équilibre entre les émissions
anthropiques par les sources et les absorptions anthropiques par les puits de gaz à
effet de serre au cours de la deuxième moitié du siècle, sur la base de l'équité, et
dans le contexte du développement durable et de la lutte contre la pauvreté.
2. Chaque Partie établit, communique et actualise les contributions déterminées
au niveau national successives qu'elle prévoit de réaliser. Les Parties prennent des
mesures internes pour l'atténuation en vue de réaliser les objectifs desdites
contributions.
3. La contribution déterminée au niveau national suivante de chaque Partie
représentera une progression par rapport à la contribution déterminée au niveau
national antérieure et correspondra à son niveau d'ambition le plus élevé possible,
compte tenu de ses responsabilités communes mais différenciées et de ses capacités
respectives, eu égard aux différentes situations nationales.
4. Les pays développés Parties devraient continuer de montrer la voie en
assumant des objectifs de réduction des émissions en chiffres absolus à l'échelle de
l'économie. Les pays en développement Parties devraient continuer d'accroître
leurs efforts d'atténuation, et sont encouragés à passer progressivement à des
objectifs de réduction ou de limitation des émissions à l'échelle de l'économie eu
égard aux différentes situations nationales.
- 4-

--- Page 59 ---
5. Un appui est fourni aux pays en développement Parties pour l'application du
présent article, conformément aux articles 9, 10 et 11, étant entendu qu'un appui
renforcé en faveur des pays en développement Parties leur permettra de prendre des
mesures plus ambitieuses.
6. Les pays les moins avancés et les petits États insulaires en développement
peuvent établir et communiquer des stratégies, plans et mesures de développement
à faible émission de gaz à effet de serre correspondant à leur situation particulière.
7. Les retombées bénéfiques, dans le domaine de l'atténuation, des mesures
d'adaptation et/ou des plans de diversification économique des Parties peuvent
contribuer aux résultats d'atténuation en application du présent article.
8. En communiquant leurs contributions déterminées au niveau national, toutes
les Parties présentent l'information nécessaire à la clarté, la transparence et la
compréhension conformément à la décision 1/CP.21 et à toutes les décisions
pertinentes de la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au
présent Accord.
9. Chaque Partie communique une contribution déterminée au niveau national
tous les cinq ans conformément à la décision 1/CP.21 et à toutes les décisions
pertinentes de la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au
présent Accord de Paris et en tenant compte des résultats du bilan mondial prévu à
l'article 14.
10. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord examine des calendriers communs pour les contributions déterminées au
niveau national à sa première session.
11. Une Partie peut à tout moment modifier sa contribution déterminée au
niveau national afin d'en relever le niveau d'ambition, conformément aux
directives adoptées par la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des
Parties au présent Accord.
12. Les contributions déterminées au niveau national communiquées par les
Parties sont consignées dans un registre public tenu par le secrétariat.
13. Les Parties rendent compte de leurs contributions déterminées au niveau
national. Dans la comptabilisation des émissions et des absorptions anthropiques
correspondant à leurs contributions déterminées au niveau national, les Parties
- 5-

--- Page 60 ---
promeuvent l'intégrité environnementale, la transparence, l'exactitude,
l'exhaustivité, la comparabilité et la cohérence, et veillent à ce qu'un double
comptage soit évité, conformément aux directives adoptées par la Conférence des
Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord.
14. Dans le contexte de leurs contributions déterminées au niveau national,
lorsqu'elles indiquent et appliquent des mesures d'atténuation concernant les
émissions et les absorptions anthropiques, les Parties devraient tenir compte, selon
qu'il convient, des méthodes et des directives en vigueur conformément à la
Convention, compte tenu des dispositions du paragraphe 13 du présent article.
15. Les Parties tiennent compte, dans la mise en œuvre du présent Accord, des
préoccupations des Parties dont l'économie est particulièrement touchée par les
effets des mesures de riposte, en particulier les pays en développement Parties.
16. Les Parties, y compris les organisations régionales d'intégration économique
et leurs États membres, qui se sont mises d'accord pour agir conjointement en
application du paragraphe 2 du présent article, notifient au secrétariat les termes de
l'accord pertinent, y compris le niveau d'émissions attribué à chaque Partie
pendant la période considérée, au moment de communiquer leurs contributions
déterminées au niveau national. Le secrétariat informe à son tour les Parties à la
Convention et les signataires des termes de l'accord.
17. Chaque Partie à un accord de ce type est responsable de son niveau
d'émissions indiqué dans l'accord visé au paragraphe 16 du présent article
conformément aux paragraphes 13 et 14 du présent article et aux articles 13 et 15.
18. Si des Parties agissant conjointement le font dans le cadre d'une organisation
régionale d'intégration économique qui est elle-même partie au présent Accord, et
en concertation avec elle, chaque État membre de cette organisation régionale
d'intégration économique, à titre individuel et conjointement avec l'organisation
régionale d'intégration économique, est responsable de son niveau d'émissions
indiqué dans l'accord communiqué en application du paragraphe 16 du présent
article conformément aux paragraphes 13 et 14 du présent article et aux articles 13
et 15.
19. Toutes les Parties devraient s'employer à formuler et communiquer des
stratégies à long terme de développement à faible émission de gaz à effet de serre,
en gardant à l'esprit l'article 2 compte tenu de leurs responsabilités communes
mais différenciées et de leurs capacités respectives, eu égard aux différentes
situations nationales.
- 6-

--- Page 61 ---
Article 20
1. Les Parties devraient prendre des mesures pour conserver et, le cas échéant,
renforcer les puits et réservoirs de gaz à effet de serre comme le prévoit l'alinéa d)
du paragraphe 1 de l'article 4 de la Convention, notamment les forêts.
2. Les Parties sont invitées à prendre des mesures pour appliquer et étayer,
notamment par des versements liés aux résultats, le cadre existant défini dans les
directives et les décisions pertinentes déjà adoptées en vertu de la Convention
pour : les démarches générales et les mesures d'incitation positive concernant les
activités liées à la réduction des émissions résultant du déboisement et de la
dégradation des forêts, et le rôle de la conservation, de la gestion durable des forêts
et de l'accroissement des stocks de carbone forestiers dans les pays en
développement; et d'autres démarches générales, notamment des démarches
conjointes en matière d'atténuation et d'adaptation pour la gestion intégrale et
durable des forêts, tout en réaffirmant qu'il importe de promouvoir, selon qu'il
convient, les avantages non liés au carbone associés à de telles démarches.
Article 6
1. Les Parties reconnaissent que certaines Parties décident de coopérer
volontairement dans la mise en œuvre de leurs contributions déterminées au niveau
national pour relever le niveau d'ambition de leurs mesures d'atténuation et
d'adaptation et pour promouvoir le développement durable et l'intégrité
environnementale.
2. Les Parties, lorsqu'elles mènent à titre volontaire des démarches concertées
passant par l'utilisation de résultats d'atténuation transférés au niveau international
aux fins des contributions déterminées au niveau national, promeuvent le
développement durable et garantissent l'intégrité environnementale et la
transparence, y compris en matière de gouvernance, et appliquent un système fiable
de comptabilisation, afin notamment d'éviter un double comptage, conformément
aux directives adoptées par la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des
Parties au présent Accord.
3. L'utilisation de résultats d'atténuation transférés au niveau international pour
réaliser les contributions déterminées au niveau national en vertu du présent
Accord revêt un caractère volontaire et est soumise à l'autorisation des Parties
participantes.
- 7-

--- Page 62 ---
4. Il est établi un mécanisme pour contribuer à l'atténuation des émissions de
gaz à effet de serre et promouvoir le développement durable, placé sous l'autorité
de la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord, dont il suit les directives, à l'intention des Parties, qui l'utilisent à titre
volontaire. Il est supervisé par un organe désigné par la Conférence des Parties
agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord, et a pour objet de :
a) Promouvoir l'atténuation des émissions de gaz à effet de serre tout en
favorisant le développement durable;
b) Promouvoir et faciliter la participation à l'atténuation des gaz à effet
de serre d'entités publiques et privées autorisées par une Partie;
c) Contribuer à la réduction des niveaux d'émissions dans la Partie hôte,
qui bénéficiera d'activités d'atténuation donnant lieu à des réductions d'émissions
qui peuvent aussi être utilisées par une autre Partie pour remplir sa contribution
déterminée au niveau national;
d) Permettre une atténuation globale des émissions mondiales.
5. Les réductions d'émissions résultant du mécanisme visé au paragraphe 4 du
présent article ne sont pas utilisées pour établir la réalisation de la contribution
déterminée au niveau national de la Partie hôte, si elles sont utilisées par une autre
Partie pour établir la réalisation de sa propre contribution déterminée au niveau
national.
6. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord de Paris veille à ce qu'une part des fonds provenant d'activités menées au
titre du mécanisme visé au paragraphe 4 du présent article soit utilisée pour couvrir
les dépenses administratives ainsi que pour aider les pays en développement Parties
qui sont particulièrement vulnérables aux effets néfastes des changements
climatiques à financer le coût de l'adaptation.
7. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord de Paris adopte des règles, des modalités et des procédures pour le
mécanisme visé au paragraphe 4 du présent article à sa première session.
8. Les Parties reconnaissent l'importance de disposer de démarches non
fondées sur le marché intégrées, globales et équilibrées pour les aider dans la mise
- 8-

--- Page 63 ---
en œuvre de leur contribution déterminée au niveau national, dans le contexte du
développement durable et de l'élimination de la pauvreté, d'une manière
coordonnée et efficace, notamment par l'atténuation, l'adaptation, le financement,
le transfert de technologies et le renforcement des capacités, selon qu'il convient.
Ces démarches visent à :
a) Promouvoir l'ambition en matière d'atténuation et d'adaptation;
b) Renforcer la participation des secteurs public et privé à la mise en
œuvre des contributions déterminées au niveau national;
c) Faciliter des possibilités de coordination entre les instruments et les
dispositifs institutionnels pertinents.
9. Il est défini un cadre pour les démarches non fondées sur le marché en
matière de développement durable afin de promouvoir les démarches non fondées
sur le marché visées au paragraphe 8 du présent article.
Article 7
1. Les Parties établissent l'objectif mondial en matière d'adaptation consistant
à renforcer les capacités d'adaptation, à accroître la résilience aux changements
climatiques et à réduire la vulnérabilité à ces changements, en vue de contribuer au
développement durable et de garantir une riposte adéquate en matière d'adaptation
dans le contexte de l'objectif de température énoncé à l'article 2.
2. Les Parties reconnaissent que l'adaptation est un défi mondial qui se pose à
tous, comportant des dimensions locales, infranationales, nationales, régionales et
internationales, et que c'est un élément clef de la riposte mondiale à long terme
face aux changements climatiques, à laquelle elle contribue, afin de protéger les
populations, les moyens d'existence et les écosystèmes, en tenant compte des
besoins urgents et immédiats des pays en développement Parties qui sont
particulièrement vulnérables aux effets néfastes des changements climatiques.
3. Les efforts d'adaptation des pays en développement Parties sont reconnus
conformément aux modalités qui seront adoptées par la Conférence des Parties
agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord, à sa première session.
- 9-

--- Page 64 ---
4. Les Parties reconnaissent que le besoin actuel d'adaptation est important,
que des niveaux d'atténuation plus élevés peuvent réduire la nécessité d'efforts
supplémentaires d'adaptation, et que des besoins d'adaptation plus élevés peuvent
entraîner des coûts d'adaptation plus importants.
5. Les Parties reconnaissent que l'action pour l'adaptation devrait suivre une
démarche impulsée par les pays, sensible à l'égalité des sexes, participative et
totalement transparente, prenant en considération les groupes, les communautés et
les écosystèmes vulnérables, et devrait tenir compte et s'inspirer des meilleures
données scientifiques disponibles et, selon qu'il convient, des connaissances
traditionnelles, du savoir des peuples autochtones et des systèmes de connaissances
locaux, en vue d'intégrer l'adaptation dans les politiques et les mesures
socioéconomiques et environnementales pertinentes, s'il y a lieu.
6. Les Parties reconnaissent l'importance de l'appui et de la coopération
internationale aux efforts d'adaptation et la nécessité de prendre en considération
les besoins des pays en développement Parties, notamment de ceux qui sont
particulièrement vulnérables aux effets néfastes des changements climatiques.
7. Les Parties devraient intensifier leur coopération en vue d'améliorer l'action
pour l'adaptation, compte tenu du Cadre de l'adaptation de Cancun, notamment
afin :
a) D'échanger des renseignements, des bonnes pratiques, des expériences
et des enseignements, y compris, selon qu'il convient, pour ce qui est des
connaissances scientifiques, de la planification, des politiques et de la mise en
œuvre relatives aux mesures d'adaptation;
b) De renforcer les dispositifs institutionnels, notamment ceux relevant
de la Convention qui concourent à l'application du présent Accord, pour faciliter la
synthèse des informations et des connaissances pertinentes et la fourniture d'un
appui et de conseils techniques aux Parties;
c) D'améliorer les connaissances scientifiques sur le climat, y compris la
recherche, l'observation systématique du système climatique et les systèmes
d'alerte précoce, d'une manière qui soutienne les services climatiques et appuie la
prise de décisions;
d) D'aider les pays en développement Parties à recenser les pratiques
efficaces et les besoins en matière d'adaptation, les priorités, l'appui fourni et
-10-

--- Page 65 ---
l'appui reçu aux mesures et efforts d'adaptation, ainsi que les problèmes et les
lacunes selon des modalités qui promeuvent les bonnes pratiques;
e) D'accroître l'efficacité et la pérennité des mesures d'adaptation.
8. Les institutions et les organismes spécialisés des Nations Unies sont invités à
appuyer les efforts des Parties visant à réaliser les mesures définies au paragraphe 7
du présent article, compte tenu des dispositions du paragraphe 5 du présent article.
9. Chaque Partie entreprend, selon qu'il convient, des processus de
planification de l'adaptation et met en œuvre des mesures qui consistent
notamment à mettre en place ou à renforcer des plans, politiques et/ou
contributions utiles, y compris en faisant intervenir :
a) La réalisation de mesures, d'engagements et/ou d'efforts dans le
domaine de l'adaptation;
b) Le processus visant à formuler et réaliser des plans nationaux
d'adaptation;
c) L'évaluation des effets des changements climatiques et de la
vulnérabilité à ces changements en vue de formuler des mesures prioritaires
déterminées au niveau national, compte tenu des populations, des lieux et des
écosystèmes vulnérables;
d) Le suivi et l'évaluation des plans, des politiques, des programmes et
des mesures d'adaptation et les enseignements à retenir;
e) Le renforcement de la résilience des systèmes socioéconomiques et
écologiques, notamment par la diversification économique et la gestion durable des
ressources naturelles.
10. Chaque Partie devrait, selon qu'il convient, présenter et actualiser
périodiquement une communication relative à l'adaptation, où pourront figurer ses
priorités, ses besoins en matière de mise en œuvre et d'appui, ses projets et ses
mesures, sans imposer de charge supplémentaire aux pays en développement
Parties.
-11-

--- Page 66 ---
11. La communication relative à l'adaptation dont il est question au
paragraphe 10 du présent article est, selon qu'il convient, soumise et actualisée
périodiquement, intégrée à d'autres communications ou documents ou présentée
parallèlement, notamment dans un plan national d'adaptation, dans une
contribution déterminée au niveau national conformément au paragraphe 2 de
l'article 4, et/ou dans une communication nationale.
12. La communication relative à l'adaptation mentionnée au paragraphe 10 du
présent article est consignée dans un registre public tenu par le secrétariat.
13. Un appui international renforcé est fourni en permanence aux pays en
développement Parties aux fins de l'application des paragraphes 7, 9, 10 et 11 du
présent article, conformément aux dispositions des articles 9, 10 et 11.
14. Le bilan mondial prévu à l'article 14 vise notamment à :
a) Prendre en compte les efforts d'adaptation des pays en développement
Parties;
b) Renforcer la mise en œuvre de mesures d'adaptation en tenant compte
de la communication sur l'adaptation mentionnée au paragraphe 10 du présent
article;
c) Examiner l'adéquation et l'efficacité de l'adaptation et de l'appui
fourni en matière d'adaptation;
d) Examiner les progrès d'ensemble accomplis dans la réalisation de
l'objectif mondial en matière d'adaptation énoncé au paragraphe 1 du présent
article.
Article 8
1. Les Parties reconnaissent la nécessité d'éviter les pertes et préjudices liés
aux effets néfastes des changements climatiques, notamment les phénomènes
météorologiques extrêmes et les phénomènes qui se manifestent lentement, de les
réduire au minimum et d'y remédier, ainsi que le rôle joué par le développement
durable dans la réduction du risque de pertes et préjudices.
-12-

--- Page 67 ---
2. Le Mécanisme international de Varsovie relatif aux pertes et préjudices liés
aux incidences des changements climatiques est placé sous l'autorité de la
Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord, dont
il suit les directives, et peut être amélioré et renforcé conformément aux décisions
de la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord.
3. Les Parties devraient améliorer la compréhension, l'action et l'appui,
notamment par le biais du Mécanisme international de Varsovie, selon que de
besoin, dans le cadre de la coopération et de la facilitation, eu égard aux pertes et
préjudices liés aux effets néfastes des changements climatiques.
4. En conséquence, les domaines de coopération et de facilitation visant à
améliorer la compréhension, l'action et l'appui sont notamment les suivants :
a) Les systèmes d'alerte précoce;
b) La préparation aux situations d'urgence;
c) Les phénomènes qui se manifestent lentement;
d) Les phénomènes susceptibles de causer des pertes et préjudices
irréversibles et permanents;
e) L'évaluation et la gestion complètes des risques;
f) Les dispositifs d'assurance dommages, la mutualisation des risques
climatiques et les autres solutions en matière d'assurance;
g) Les pertes autres qu'économiques;
h) La résilience des communautés, des moyens de subsistance et des
écosystèmes.
5. Le Mécanisme international de Varsovie collabore avec les organes et
groupes d'experts relevant de l'Accord, ainsi qu'avec les organisations et les
organes d'experts compétents qui n'en relèvent pas.
-13-

--- Page 68 ---
Article 20
1. Les pays développés Parties fournissent des ressources financières pour
venir en aide aux pays en développement Parties aux fins tant de l'atténuation que
de l'adaptation dans la continuité de leurs obligations au titre de la Convention.
2. Les autres Parties sont invitées à fournir ou à continuer de fournir ce type
d'appui à titre volontaire.
3. Dans le cadre d'un effort mondial, les pays développés Parties devraient
continuer de montrer la voie en mobilisant des moyens de financement de l'action
climatique provenant d'un large éventail de sources, d'instruments et de filières,
compte tenu du rôle notable que jouent les fonds publics, par le biais de diverses
actions, notamment en appuyant des stratégies impulsées par les pays et en tenant
compte des besoins et des priorités des pays en développement Parties. Cette
mobilisation de moyens de financement de l'action climatique devrait représenter
une progression par rapport aux efforts antérieurs.
4. La fourniture de ressources financières accrues devrait viser à parvenir à un
équilibre entre l'adaptation et l'atténuation, en tenant compte des stratégies
impulsées par les pays et des priorités et besoins des pays en développement
Parties, notamment de ceux qui sont particulièrement vulnérables aux effets
néfastes des changements climatiques et dont les capacités sont très insuffisantes
comme les pays les moins avancés, et les petits États insulaires en développement,
eu égard à la nécessité de prévoir des ressources d'origine publique et sous forme
de dons pour l'adaptation.
5. Les pays développés Parties communiquent tous les deux ans des
informations quantitatives et qualitatives à caractère indicatif ayant trait aux
paragraphes 1 et 3 du présent article, selon qu'il convient, notamment, s'ils sont
disponibles, les montants prévus des ressources financières publiques à accorder
aux pays en développement Parties. Les autres Parties qui fournissent des
ressources sont invitées à communiquer ces informations tous les deux ans à titre
volontaire.
6. Le bilan mondial prévu à l'article 14 prendra en compte les informations
pertinentes communiquées par les pays développés Parties et/ou les organes créés
en vertu de l'Accord sur les efforts liés au financement de l'action climatique.
-14-

--- Page 69 ---
7. Les pays développés Parties communiquent tous les deux ans des
informations transparentes et cohérentes sur l'appui fourni aux pays en
développement Parties et mobilisé par des interventions publiques, conformément
aux modalités, procédures et lignes directrices que la Conférence des Parties
agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord adoptera à sa première
session, comme il est prévu au paragraphe 13 de l'article 13. Les autres Parties sont
invitées à faire de même.
8. Le Mécanisme financier de la Convention, y compris ses entités
fonctionnelles, remplit les fonctions de mécanisme financier du présent Accord.
9. Les institutions concourant à l'application du présent Accord, y compris les
entités fonctionnelles du Mécanisme financier de la Convention, visent à garantir
l'accès effectif aux ressources financières par le biais de procédures d'approbation
simplifiées et d'un appui renforcé à la préparation en faveur des pays en
développement Parties, en particulier des pays les moins avancés et des petits États
insulaires en développement, dans le cadre de leurs stratégies et leurs plans
nationaux relatifs au climat.
Article 10
1. Les Parties partagent une vision à long terme de l'importance qu'il y a à
donner pleinement effet à la mise au point et au transfert de technologies de façon à
accroître la résilience aux changements climatiques et à réduire les émissions de
gaz à effet de serre.
2. Les Parties, notant l'importance de la technologie pour la mise en œuvre de
mesures d'atténuation et d'adaptation en vertu du présent Accord et prenant acte
des efforts entrepris pour déployer et diffuser la technologie, renforcent l'action de
coopération concernant la mise au point et le transfert de technologies.
3. Le Mécanisme technologique créé en vertu de la Convention concourt à
l'application du présent Accord.
4. Il est créé un cadre technologique chargé de donner des directives générales
aux travaux du Mécanisme technologique visant à promouvoir et faciliter une
action renforcée en matière de mise au point et de transfert de technologies de
façon à appuyer la mise en œuvre du présent Accord, aux fins de la vision à long
terme mentionnée au paragraphe 1 du présent article.
-15-

--- Page 70 ---
5. Il est essentiel d'accélérer, d'encourager et de permettre l'innovation pour
une riposte mondiale efficace à long terme face aux changements climatiques et au
service de la croissance économique et du développement durable. Cet effort sera
appuyé, selon qu'il convient, y compris par le Mécanisme technologique et, sous la
forme de moyens financiers, par le Mécanisme financier de la Convention, afin de
mettre en place des collaborations en matière de recherche-développement et de
faciliter l'accès des pays en développement Parties à la technologie, en particulier
aux premiers stades du cycle technologique.
6. Un appui, financier notamment, est fourni aux pays en développement
Parties aux fins de l'application du présent article, y compris pour le renforcement
d'une action de coopération en matière de mise au point et de transfert de
technologies à différents stades du cycle technologique, en vue de parvenir à un
équilibre entre l'appui à l'atténuation et l'appui à l'adaptation. Le bilan mondial
prévu à l'article 14 prend en compte les informations disponibles sur les activités
d'appui à la mise au point et au transfert de technologies en faveur des pays en
développement Parties.
Article 11
1. Le renforcement des capacités au titre du présent Accord devrait contribuer à
améliorer les aptitudes et les capacités des pays en développement Parties, en
particulier ceux qui ont les plus faibles capacités, tels que les pays les moins
avancés, et ceux qui sont particulièrement vulnérables aux effets néfastes des
changements climatiques comme les petits États insulaires en développement, afin
qu'ils puissent lutter efficacement contre les changements climatiques, notamment
mettre en œuvre des mesures d'adaptation et d'atténuation, et devrait faciliter la
mise au point, la diffusion et le déploiement de technologies, l'accès à des moyens
de financement de l'action climatique, les aspects pertinents de l'éducation, de la
formation et de la sensibilisation de la population, et la communication
transparente et précise d'informations en temps voulu.
2. Le renforcement des capacités devrait être impulsé par les pays, prendre en
compte et satisfaire les besoins nationaux et favoriser l'appropriation par les
Parties, en particulier pour les pays en développement Parties, notamment aux
niveaux national, infranational et local. Il devrait s'inspirer des enseignements tirés
de l'expérience, notamment des activités de renforcement des capacités menées
dans le cadre de la Convention, et représenter un processus efficace, itératif,
participatif, transversal et sensible à l'égalité des sexes.

--- Page 71 ---
3. Toutes les Parties devraient coopérer en vue d'accroître la capacité des pays
en développement Parties de mettre en œuvre le présent Accord. Les pays
développés Parties devraient étoffer l'appui apporté aux mesures de renforcement
des capacités dans les pays en développement Parties.
4. Toutes les Parties qui s'emploient à accroître la capacité des pays en
développement Parties de mettre en œuvre le présent Accord, y compris par des
démarches régionales, bilatérales et multilatérales, font régulièrement connaître ces
mesures ou initiatives de renforcement des capacités. Les pays en développement
Parties devraient régulièrement informer des progrès réalisés dans l'application de
plans, politiques, initiatives ou mesures de renforcement des capacités visant à
mettre en œuvre le présent Accord.
5. Les activités de renforcement des capacités sont étoffées par le biais de
dispositifs institutionnels appropriés visant à appuyer la mise en œuvre du présent
Accord, y compris les dispositifs institutionnels appropriés créés en application de
la Convention qui concourent à l'application du présent Accord. A sa première
session, la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord examinera et adoptera une décision sur les dispositifs institutionnels
initiaux relatifs au renforcement des capacités.
Article 12
Les Parties coopèrent en prenant, selon qu'il convient, des mesures pour
améliorer l'éducation, la formation, la sensibilisation, la participation du public et
l'accès de la population à l'information dans le domaine des changements
climatiques, compte tenu de l'importance que revêtent de telles mesures pour
renforcer l'action engagée au titre du présent Accord.
Article 13
1. Afin de renforcer la confiance mutuelle et de promouvoir une mise en œuvre
efficace, il est créé un cadre de transparence renforcé des mesures et de l'appui,
assorti d'une certaine flexibilité, qui tient compte des capacités différentes des
Parties et qui s'appuie sur l'expérience collective.
2. Le cadre de transparence accorde aux pays en développement Parties qui en
ont besoin, compte tenu de leurs capacités, une certaine flexibilité dans la mise en
œuvre des dispositions du présent article. Les modalités, procédures et lignes
-17-

--- Page 72 ---
directrices prévues au paragraphe 13 du présent article tiennent compte de cette
flexibilité.
3. Le cadre de transparence s'appuie sur les dispositifs relatifs à la transparence
prévus en vertu de la Convention et les renforce en tenant compte de la situation
particulière des pays les moins avancés et des petits États insulaires en
développement, et doit être mis en œuvre d'une façon qui soit axée sur la
facilitation, qui ne soit ni intrusive ni punitive, qui respecte la souveraineté
nationale et qui évite d'imposer une charge excessive aux Parties.
4. Les dispositifs relatifs à la transparence prévus en vertu de la Convention,
notamment les communications nationales, les rapports biennaux et les rapports
biennaux actualisés, l'évaluation et l'examen au niveau international et les
consultations et analyses internationales, font partie de l'expérience mise à profit
pour l'élaboration des modalités, procédures et lignes directrices visées au
paragraphe 13 du présent article.
5. Le. cadre de transparence des mesures vise à fournir une image claire des
mesures relatives aux changements climatiques à la lumière de l'objectif énoncé à
l'article 2 de la Convention, notamment en éclairant et en suivant les progrès
accomplis par chaque Partie en vue de s'acquitter de sa contribution déterminée au
niveau national au titre de l'article 4 et de mettre en œuvre ses mesures
d'adaptation au titre de l'article 7, notamment les bonnes pratiques, les priorités,
les besoins et les lacunes, afin d'éclairer le bilan mondial prévu à l'article 14.
6. Le cadre de transparence de l'appui vise à donner une image claire de
l'appui fourni et de l'appui reçu par chaque Partie concernée dans le contexte des
mesures prises à l'égard des changements climatiques au titre des articles 4, 7, 9,
10 et 11, et, dans la mesure du possible, une vue d'ensemble de l'appui financier
global fourni, pour éclairer le bilan mondial prévu à l'article 14.
7. Chaque Partie fournit régulièrement les informations ci-après :
a) Un rapport national d'inventaire des émissions anthropiques par les
sources et des absorptions anthropiques par les puits de gaz à effet de serre, établi
selon les méthodes constituant de bonnes pratiques adoptées par le Groupe
d'experts intergouvernemental sur l'évolution du climat et convenues par la
Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord;

--- Page 73 ---
b) Les informations nécessaires au suivi des progrès accomplis par
chaque Partie dans la mise en œuvre et la réalisation de sa contribution déterminée
au niveau national au titre de l'article 4.
8. Chaque Partie devrait également communiquer des informations sur les
effets des changements climatiques et sur l'adaptation à ces changements au titre
de l'article 7, selon qu'il convient.
9. Les pays développés Parties doivent, et les autres Parties qui apportent un
appui devraient, communiquer des informations sur l'appui fourni, sous la forme de
ressources financières, d'un transfert de technologies et d'un renforcement des
capacités, aux pays en développement Parties au titre des articles 9, 10 et 11.
10. Les pays en développement Parties devraient communiquer des informations
sur l'appui dont ils ont besoin et qu'ils ont reçu, sous la forme de ressources
financières, d'un transfert de technologies et d'un renforcement des capacités au
titre des articles 9, 10 et 11.
11. Les informations communiquées par chaque Partie au titre des paragraphes 7
et 9 du présent article sont soumises à un examen technique par des experts,
conformément à la décision 1/CP.21. Pour les pays en développement Parties qui
en ont besoin compte tenu de leurs capacités, le processus d'examen les aide à
définir leurs besoins en matière de renforcement des capacités. En outre, chaque
Partie participe à un examen multilatéral, axé sur la facilitation, des progrès
accomplis eu égard aux efforts entrepris en vertu de l'article 9, ainsi que dans la
mise en œuvre et la réalisation de sa contribution déterminée au niveau national.
12. L'examen technique par des experts prévu dans ce paragraphe porte sur
l'appui fourni par la Partie concernée, selon qu'il convient, ainsi que sur la mise en
œuvre et la réalisation de sa contribution déterminée au niveau national. Il met en
évidence les domaines se prêtant à des améliorations chez la Partie concernée et
vérifie que les informations communiquées sont conformes aux modalités,
procédures et lignes directrices visées au paragraphe 13 du présent article, compte
tenu de la flexibilité accordée à la Partie concernée conformément au paragraphe 2
de cet article. Il prête une attention particulière aux capacités et situations
nationales respectives des pays en développement Parties.
13. À sa première session, en s'appuyant sur l'expérience tirée des dispositifs
relatifs à la transparence prévus en vertu de la Convention, et en précisant les
dispositions du présent article, la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion
-19-

--- Page 74 ---
des Parties au présent Accord adopte des modalités, des procédures et des lignes
directrices communes, selon qu'il convient, aux fins de la transparence des mesures
et de l'appui.
14. Un appui est fourni aux pays en développement aux fins de la mise en œuvre
du présent article.
15. Un appui est également fourni pour renforcer en permanence les capacités
des pays en développement Parties en matière de transparence.
Article 14
1. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord fait périodiquement le bilan de la mise en œuvre du présent Accord afin
d'évaluer les progrès collectifs accomplis dans la réalisation de l'objet du présent
Accord et de ses buts à long terme (ci-après dénommé « bilan mondial »). Elle s'y
emploie d'une manière globale, axée sur la facilitation, en prenant en considération
l'atténuation, l'adaptation, les moyens de mise en œuvre et l'appui et en tenant
compte de l'équité et des meilleures données scientifiques disponibles.
2. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord procède à son premier bilan mondial en 2023 et tous les cinq ans par la
suite sauf si elle adopte une décision contraire.
3. Les résultats du bilan mondial éclairent les Parties dans l'actualisation et le
renforcement de leurs mesures et de leur appui selon des modalités déterminées au
niveau national, conformément aux dispositions pertinentes du présent Accord,
ainsi que dans l'intensification de la coopération internationale pour l'action
climatique.
Article 15
1. Il est institué un mécanisme pour faciliter la mise en œuvre et promouvoir le
respect des dispositions du présent Accord.
2. Le mécanisme visé au paragraphe 1 du présent article est constitué d'un
comité d'experts et axé sur la facilitation, et fonctionne d'une manière qui est
transparente, non accusatoire et non punitive. Le comité accorde une attention
particulière à la situation et aux capacités nationales respectives des Parties.
-20-

--- Page 75 ---
3. Le comité exerce ses activités selon les modalités et procédures arrêtées par
la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord à
sa première session et lui rend compte chaque année.
Article 16
1. En tant qu'organe suprême de la Convention, la Conférence des Parties agit
comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord.
2. Les Parties à la Convention qui ne sont pas Parties au présent Accord
peuvent participer en qualité d'observateurs aux travaux de toute session de la
Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord.
Lorsque la Conférence des Parties agit comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord, les décisions au titre dudit Accord sont prises uniquement par les Parties à
la Convention qui sont Parties à l'Accord.
3. Lorsque la Conférence des Parties agit comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord, tout membre du Bureau de la Conférence des Parties représentant une
Partie à la Convention mais qui, à ce moment-là, n'est pas Partie au présent
Accord, est remplacé par un nouveau membre élu par les Parties à l'Accord et
parmi celles-ci.
4. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord fait régulièrement le point de la mise en œuvre du présent Accord et prend,
dans les limites de son mandat, les décisions nécessaires pour en promouvoir la
mise en œuvre effective. Elle exerce les fonctions qui lui sont conférées par le
présent Accord et :
a) Elle crée les organes subsidiaires jugés nécessaires à la mise en œuvre
du présent Accord;
b) Elle exerce les autres fonctions qui peuvent se révéler nécessaires aux
fins de la mise en œuvre du présent Accord.
5. Le règlement intérieur de la Conférence des Parties et les procédures
financières appliquées au titre de la Convention s'appliquent mutatis mutandis au
titre du présent Accord, sauf si la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion
des Parties au présent Accord en décide autrement par consensus.
-21-

--- Page 76 ---
6. Le secrétariat convoque la première session de la Conférence des Parties
agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord à l'occasion de la première
session de la Conférence des Parties prévue après l'entrée en vigueur du présent
Accord. Les sessions ordinaires ultérieures de la Conférence des Parties agissant
comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord coïncideront avec les sessions
ordinaires de la Conférence des Parties, à moins que la Conférence des Parties
agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord n'en décide autrement.
7. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord tient des sessions extraordinaires à tout autre moment lorsqu'elle le juge
nécessaire ou si une Partie en fait la demande par écrit, à condition que cette
demande soit appuyée par un tiers au moins des Parties dans les six mois qui
suivent sa communication aux Parties par le secrétariat.
8. L'Organisation des Nations Unies, ses institutions spécialisées et l'Agence
internationale de l'énergie atomique, ainsi que tout État membre d'une de ces
organisations ou doté du statut d'observateur auprès de l'une d'elles qui n'est pas
Partie à la Convention, peuvent être représentés aux sessions de la Conférence des
Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord en qualité
d'observateurs. Tout organe ou organisme, national ou international,
gouvernemental ou non gouvernemental, qui est compétent dans les domaines visés
par le présent Accord et qui a fait savoir au secrétariat qu'il souhaitait être
représenté en qualité d'observateur à une session de la Conférence des Parties
agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord peut y être admis en cette
qualité à moins qu'un tiers au moins des Parties présentes n'y fassent objection.
L'admission et la participation d'observateurs sont régies par le règlement intérieur
visé au paragraphe 5 du présent article.
Article 17
1. Le secrétariat créé en application de l'article 8 de la Convention assure le
secrétariat du présent Accord.
2. Le paragraphe 2 de l'article 8 de la Convention relatif aux fonctions de
secrétariat et le paragraphe 3 de ce même article concernant les dispositions
voulues pour son fonctionnement s'appliquent mutatis mutandis au présent Accord.
Le secrétariat exerce en outre les fonctions qui lui sont confiées au titre du présent
Accord et par la Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au
présent Accord.
-22-

--- Page 77 ---
Article 18
1. L'Organe subsidiaire de conseil scientifique et technologique et l'Organe
subsidiaire de mise en œuvre créés par les articles 9 et 10 de la Convention font
office, respectivement, d'Organe subsidiaire de conseil scientifique et
technologique et d'Organe subsidiaire de mise en œuvre du présent Accord. Les
dispositions de la Convention relatives au fonctionnement de ces deux organes
s'appliquent mutatis mutandis au présent Accord. Les réunions de l'Organe
subsidiaire de conseil scientifique et technologique et de l'Organe subsidiaire de
mise en œuvre du présent Accord coïncident avec celles de l'Organe subsidiaire de
conseil scientifique et technologique et de l'Organe subsidiaire de mise en œuvre
de la Convention.
2. Les Parties à la Convention qui ne sont pas Parties au présent Accord
peuvent participer en qualité d'observateurs aux travaux de toute session des
organes subsidiaires. Lorsque les organes subsidiaires agissent en tant qu'organes
subsidiaires du présent Accord, les décisions au titre dudit Accord sont prises
uniquement par les Parties à la Convention qui sont Parties à l'Accord.
3. Lorsque les organes subsidiaires créés par les articles 9 et 10 de la
Convention exercent leurs fonctions dans un domaine qui relève du présent Accord,
tout membre de leurs bureaux représentant une Partie à la Convention mais qui, à
ce moment-là, n'est pas Partie au présent Accord, est remplacé par un nouveau
membre élu par les Parties à l'Accord et parmi celles-ci.
Article 19
1. Les organes subsidiaires ou les autres dispositifs institutionnels créés par la
Convention ou qui en relèvent, autres que ceux mentionnés dans le présent Accord,
concourent à l'application du présent Accord sur décision de la Conférence des
Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent Accord. Celle-ci précise les
fonctions qu'exerceront lesdits organes ou dispositifs.
2. La Conférence des Parties agissant comme réunion des Parties au présent
Accord peut donner de nouvelles directives à ces organes subsidiaires et dispositifs
institutionnels.

--- Page 78 ---
Article 20
1. Le présent Accord est ouvert à la signature et soumis à la ratification,
l'acceptation ou l'approbation des États et des organisations régionales
d'intégration économique qui sont Parties à la Convention. Il sera ouvert à la
signature au Siège de l'Organisation des Nations Unies à New York du 22 avril
2016 au 21 avril 2017 et sera ouvert à l'adhésion dès le lendemain du jour où il
cessera d'être ouvert à la signature. Les instruments de ratification, d'acceptation,
d'approbation ou d'adhésion sont déposés auprès du Dépositaire.
2. Toute organisation régionale d'intégration économique qui devient Partie au
présent Accord sans qu'aucun de ses États membres y soit Partie est liée par toutes
les obligations découlant du présent Accord. Lorsqu'un ou plusieurs États membres
d'une organisation régionale d'intégration économique sont Parties au présent
Accord, cette organisation et ses États membres conviennent de leurs
responsabilités respectives aux fins de l'exécution de leurs obligations au titre du
présent Accord. En pareil cas, l'organisation et ses États membres ne sont pas
habilités à exercer concurremment les droits découlant du présent Accord.
3. Dans leurs instruments de ratification, d'acceptation, d'approbation ou
d'adhésion, les organisations régionales d'intégration économique indiquent
l'étendue de leur compétence à l'égard des questions régies par le présent Accord.
En outre, ces organisations informent le Dépositaire, qui en informe à son tour les
Parties, de toute modification importante de l'étendue de leur compétence.
Article 21
1. Le présent Accord entre en vigueur le trentième jour qui suit la date du dépôt
de leurs instruments de ratification, d'acceptation, d'approbation ou d'adhésion par
au moins 55 Parties à la Convention qui représentent au total au moins un
pourcentage estimé à 55 % du total des émissions mondiales de gaz à effet de serre.
2. Aux seules fins du paragraphe 1 du présent article, on entend par « total des
émissions mondiales de gaz à effet de serre » la quantité la plus récente
communiquée le jour de l'adoption du présent Accord par les Parties à la
Convention ou avant cette date.
3. À l'égard de chaque État ou organisation régionale d'intégration économique
qui ratifie, accepte ou approuve l'Accord ou y adhère une fois que les conditions
requises pour l'entrée en vigueur énoncées au paragraphe 1 du présent article ont
été remplies, le présent Accord entre en vigueur le trentième jour qui suit la date du
-24-

--- Page 79 ---
dépôt par cet État ou cette organisation de son instrument de ratification,
d'acceptation, d'approbation ou d'adhésion.
4. Aux fins du paragraphe 1 du présent article, tout instrument déposé par une
organisation régionale d'intégration économique ne s'ajoute pas à ceux qui sont
déposés par les États membres de cette organisation.
Article 22
Les dispositions de l'article 15 de la Convention relatif à l'adoption
d'amendements s'appliquent mutatis mutandis au présent Accord.
Article 23
1. Les dispositions de l'article 16 de la Convention relatives à l'adoption et à
l'amendement d'annexes de la Convention s'appliquent mutatis mutandis au
présent Accord.
2. Les annexes du présent Accord font partie intégrante de celui-ci et, sauf
disposition contraire expresse, toute référence au présent Accord constitue en
même temps une référence à ses annexes. Celles-ci se limitent à des listes,
formules et autres documents descriptifs de caractère scientifique, technique,
procédural ou administratif.
Article 24
Les dispositions de l'article 14 de la Convention relatif au règlement des
différends s'appliquent mutatis mutandis au présent Accord.
Article 25
1. Chaque Partie dispose d'une voix, sous réserve des dispositions du
paragraphe 2 du présent article.
2. Dans les domaines de leur compétence, les organisations régionales
d'intégration économique disposent, pour exercer leur droit de vote, d'un nombre
de voix égal au nombre de leurs États membres qui sont Parties au présent Accord.
-25-

--- Page 80 ---
Ces organisations n'exercent pas leur droit de vote si l'un quelconque de leurs
États membres exerce le sien, et inversement.
Article 26
Le Secrétaire général de l'Organisation des Nations Unies est le Dépositaire
du présent Accord.
Article 27
Aucune réserve ne peut être faite au présent Accord.
Article 28
1. À l'expiration d'un délai de trois ans à compter de la date d'entrée en
vigueur du présent Accord à l'égard d'une Partie, cette Partie peut, à tout moment,
le dénoncer par notification écrite adressée au Dépositaire.
2. Cette dénonciation prend effet à l'expiration d'un délai d'un an à compter de
la date à laquelle le Dépositaire en reçoit notification, ou à toute date ultérieure
pouvant être spécifiée dans ladite notification.
3. Toute Partie qui aura dénoncé la Convention sera réputée avoir dénoncé
également le présent Accord.
Article 29
L'original du présent Accord, dont les textes anglais, arabe, chinois,
espagnol, français et russe font également foi, sera déposé auprès du Secrétaire
général de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
FAIT à Paris le douze décembre deux mille quinze.
EN FOI DE QUOI les soussignés, dûment autorisés à cet effet, ont signé le présent
Accord.
-26-

--- Page 115 ---
ACUERDO DE PARÍS
Las Partes en el presente Acuerdo,
En su calidad de Partes en la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas
sobre el Cambio Climático, en adelante denominada "la Convención",
De conformidad con la Plataforma de Durban para una Acción Reforzada
establecida mediante la decisión 1/CP.17 de la Conferencia de las Partes en la
Convención en su 17° período de sesiones,
Deseosas de hacer realidad el objetivo de la Convención y guiándose por
sus principios, incluidos los principios de la equidad y de las responsabilidades
comunes pero diferenciadas y las capacidades respectivas, a la luz de las
diferentes circunstancias nacionales,
Reconociendo la necesidad de una respuesta progresiva y eficaz a la
amenaza apremiante del cambio climático, sobre la base de los mejores
conocimientos científicos disponibles,
Reconociendo también las necesidades específicas y las circunstancias
especiales de las Partes que son países en desarrollo, sobre todo de las que son
particularmente vulnerables a los efectos adversos del cambio climático, como se
señala en la Convención,
Teniendo plenamente en cuenta las necesidades específicas y las
situaciones especiales de los países menos adelantados en lo que respecta a la
financiación y la transferencia de tecnología,
Reconociendo que las Partes pueden verse afectadas no solo por el cambio
climático, sino también por las repercusiones de las medidas que se adopten para
hacerle frente,
Poniendo de relieve la relación intrínseca que existe entre las medidas, las
respuestas y las repercusiones generadas por el cambio climático y el acceso
equitativo al desarrollo sostenible y la erradicación de la pobreza,

--- Page 116 ---
Teniendo presentes la prioridad fundamental de salvaguardar la seguridad
alimentaria y acabar con el hambre, y la particular vulnerabilidad de los sistemas
de producción de alimentos a los efectos adversos del cambio climático,
Teniendo en cuenta los imperativos de una reconversión justa de la fuerza
laboral y de la creación de trabajo decente y de empleos de calidad, de
conformidad con las prioridades de desarrollo definidas a nivel nacional,
Reconociendo que el cambio climático es un problema de toda la humanidad
y que, al adoptar medidas para hacerle frente, las Partes deberían respetar,
promover y tener en cuenta sus respectivas obligaciones relativas a los derechos
humanos, el derecho a la salud, los derechos de los pueblos indígenas, las
comunidades locales, los migrantes, los niños, las personas con discapacidad y las
personas en situaciones vulnerables y el derecho al desarrollo, así como la igualdad
de género, el empoderamiento de la mujer y la equidad intergeneracional,
Teniendo presente la importancia de conservar y aumentar, según
corresponda, los sumideros y depósitos de los gases de efecto invernadero
mencionados en la Convención,
Observando la importancia de garantizar la integridad de todos los
ecosistemas, incluidos los océanos, y la protección de la biodiversidad, reconocida
por algunas culturas como la Madre Tierra, y observando también la importancia
que tiene para algunos el concepto de "justicia climática", al adoptar medidas para
hacer frente al cambio climático,
Afirmando la importancia de la educación, la formación, la sensibilización y
participación del público, el acceso público a la información y la cooperación a
todos los niveles en los asuntos de que trata el presente Acuerdo,
Teniendo presente la importancia del compromiso de todos los niveles de
gobierno y de los diversos actores, de conformidad con la legislación nacional de
cada Parte, al hacer frente al cambio climático,
Teniendo presente también que la adopción de estilos de vida y pautas de
consumo y producción sostenibles, en un proceso encabezado por las Partes que
son países desarrollados, es una contribución importante a los esfuerzos por hacer
frente al cambio climático,
- 2-

--- Page 117 ---
Han convenido en lo siguiente:
Artículo 1
A los efectos del presente Acuerdo, se aplicarán las definiciones que figuran
en el artículo 1 de la Convención. Además:
a) Por "Convención" se entenderá la Convención Marco de las Naciones
Unidas sobre el Cambio Climático, aprobada en Nueva York el 9 de mayo de 1992;
b) Por "Conferencia de las Partes" se entenderá la Conferencia de las
Partes en la Convención;
c) Por "Parte" se entenderá una Parte en el presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 2
1. El presente Acuerdo, al mejorar la aplicación de la Convención, incluido el
logro de su objetivo, tiene por objeto reforzar la respuesta mundial a la amenaza
del cambio climático, en el contexto del desarrollo sostenible y de los esfuerzos por
erradicar la pobreza, y para ello:
a) Mantener el aumento de la temperatura media mundial muy por
debajo de 2 °C con respecto a los niveles preindustriales, y proseguir los esfuerzos
para limitar ese aumento de la temperatura a 1,5 °C con respecto a los niveles
preindustriales, reconociendo que ello reduciría considerablemente los riesgos y los
efectos del cambio climático;
b) Aumentar la capacidad de adaptación a los efectos adversos del
cambio climático y promover la resiliencia al clima y un desarrollo con bajas
emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero, de un modo que no comprometa la
producción de alimentos; y
c) Situar los flujos financieros en un nivel compatible con una
trayectoria que conduzca a un desarrollo resiliente al clima y con bajas emisiones
de gases de efecto invernadero.
- 3-

--- Page 118 ---
2. El presente Acuerdo se aplicará de modo que refleje la equidad y el principio
de las responsabilidades comunes pero diferenciadas y las capacidades respectivas,
a la luz de las diferentes circunstancias nacionales.
Artículo 3
En sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional a la respuesta mundial
al cambio climático, todas las Partes habrán de realizar y comunicar los esfuerzos
ambiciosos que se definen en los artículos 4, 7, 9, 10, 11 y 13 con miras a alcanzar
el propósito del presente Acuerdo enunciado en su artículo 2. Los esfuerzos de
todas las Partes representarán una progresión a lo largo del tiempo, teniendo en
cuenta la necesidad de apoyar a las Partes que son países en desarrollo para lograr
la aplicación efectiva del presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 4
1. Para cumplir el objetivo a largo plazo referente a la temperatura que se
establece en el artículo 2, las Partes se proponen lograr que las emisiones
mundiales de gases de efecto invernadero alcancen su punto máximo lo antes
posible, teniendo presente que las Partes que son países en desarrollo tardarán más
en lograrlo, y a partir de ese momento reducir rápidamente las emisiones de gases
de efecto invernadero, de conformidad con la mejor información científica
disponible, para alcanzar un equilibrio entre las emisiones antropógenas por las
fuentes y la absorción antropógena por los sumideros en la segunda mitad del siglo,
sobre la base de la equidad y en el contexto del desarrollo sostenible y de los
esfuerzos por erradicar la pobreza.
2. Cada Parte deberá preparar, comunicar y mantener las sucesivas
contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional que tenga previsto efectuar. Las
Partes procurarán adoptar medidas de mitigación internas, con el fin de alcanzar los
objetivos de esas contribuciones.
3. La contribución determinada a nivel nacional sucesiva de cada Parte
representará una progresión con respecto a la contribución determinada a nivel
nacional que esté vigente para esa Parte y reflejará la mayor ambición posible de
dicha Parte, teniendo en cuenta sus responsabilidades comunes pero diferenciadas y
sus capacidades respectivas, a la luz de las diferentes circunstancias nacionales.
4. Las Partes que son países desarrollados deberían seguir encabezando los
esfuerzos, adoptando metas absolutas de reducción de las emisiones para el
- 4-

--- Page 119 ---
conjunto de la economía. Las Partes que son países en desarrollo deberían seguir
aumentando sus esfuerzos de mitigación, y se las alienta a que, con el tiempo,
adopten metas de reducción o limitación de las emisiones para el conjunto de la
economía, a la luz de las diferentes circunstancias nacionales.
5. Se prestará apoyo a las Partes que son países en desarrollo para la aplicación
del presente artículo, de conformidad con lo dispuesto en los artículos 9, 10 y 11,
teniendo presente que un aumento del apoyo prestado permitirá a esas Partes
acrecentar la ambición de sus medidas.
6. Los países menos adelantados y los pequeños Estados insulares en desarrollo
podrán preparar y comunicar estrategias, planes y medidas para un desarrollo con
bajas emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero que reflejen sus circunstancias
especiales.
7. Los beneficios secundarios de mitigación que se deriven de las medidas de
adaptación y/o los planes de diversificación económica de las Partes podrán
contribuir a los resultados de mitigación en el marco del presente artículo.
8. Al comunicar sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional, todas las
Partes deberán proporcionar la información necesaria a los fines de la claridad, la
transparencia y la comprensión, con arreglo a lo dispuesto en la decisión 1/CP.21 y
en toda decisión pertinente que adopte la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de
reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo.
9. Cada Parte deberá comunicar una contribución determinada a nivel nacional
cada cinco años, de conformidad con lo dispuesto en la decisión 1/CP.21 y en toda
decisión pertinente que adopte la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión
de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo, y tener en cuenta los resultados del balance
mundial a que se refiere el artículo 14.
10. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo examinará los plazos comunes para las contribuciones
determinadas a nivel nacional en su primer período de sesiones.
11. Las Partes podrán ajustar en cualquier momento su contribución determinada
a nivel nacional que esté vigente con miras a aumentar su nivel de ambición, de
conformidad con la orientación que imparta la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad
de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo.
- 5-

--- Page 120 ---
12. Las contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional que comuniquen las Partes
se inscribirán en un registro público que llevará la secretaría.
13. Las Partes deberán rendir cuentas de sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel
nacional. Al rendir cuentas de las emisiones y la absorción antropógenas
correspondientes a sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional, las Partes
deberán promover la integridad ambiental, la transparencia, la exactitud, la
exhaustividad, la comparabilidad y la coherencia y velar por que se evite el doble
cómputo, de conformidad con las orientaciones que apruebe la Conferencia de las
Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo.
14. En el contexto de sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional, al
consignar y aplicar medidas de mitigación respecto de las emisiones y absorciones
antropógenas, las Partes deberían tener en cuenta, cuando sea el caso, los métodos
y orientaciones que existan en el marco de la Convención, a la luz de lo dispuesto
en el párrafo 13 del presente artículo.
15. Al aplicar el presente Acuerdo, las Partes deberán tomar en consideración las
preocupaciones de aquellas Partes cuyas economías se vean más afectadas por las
repercusiones de las medidas de respuesta, particularmente de las que sean países
en desarrollo.
16. Las Partes, con inclusión de las organizaciones regionales de integración
económica y sus Estados miembros, que hayan llegado a un acuerdo para actuar
conjuntamente en lo referente al párrafo 2 del presente artículo deberán notificar a
la secretaría los términos de ese acuerdo en el momento en que comuniquen sus
contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional, incluyendo el nivel de emisiones
asignado a cada Parte en el período pertinente. La secretaría comunicará a su vez
esos términos a las Partes y a los signatarios de la Convención.
17. Cada parte en ese acuerdo será responsable del nivel de emisiones que se le
haya asignado en el acuerdo mencionado en el párrafo 16 del presente artículo, de
conformidad con lo dispuesto en los párrafos 13 y 14 del presente artículo y en los
artículos 13 y 15.
18. Si las Partes que actúan conjuntamente lo hacen en el marco de una
organización regional de integración económica y junto con ella, y esa organización
es a su vez Parte en el presente Acuerdo, cada Estado miembro de esa organización
regional de integración económica, en forma individual y conjuntamente con dicha
organización, será responsable de su nivel de emisiones que figure en el acuerdo
- 6-

--- Page 121 ---
comunicado con arreglo a lo dispuesto en el párrafo 16 del presente artículo, de
conformidad con sus párrafos 13 y 14, y con los artículos 13 y 15.
19. Todas las Partes deberían esforzarse por formular y comunicar estrategias a
largo plazo para un desarrollo con bajas emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero,
teniendo presente el artículo 2 y tomando en consideración sus responsabilidades
comunes pero diferenciadas y sus capacidades respectivas, a la luz de las diferentes
circunstancias nacionales.
Artículo 5
1. Las Partes deberían adoptar medidas para conservar y aumentar, según
corresponda, los sumideros y depósitos de gases de efecto invernadero a que se
hace referencia en el artículo 4, párrafo 1 d), de la Convención, incluidos los
bosques.
2. Se alienta a las Partes a que adopten medidas para aplicar y apoyar, también
mediante los pagos basados en los resultados, el marco establecido en las
orientaciones y decisiones pertinentes ya adoptadas en el ámbito de la Convención
respecto de los enfoques de política y los incentivos positivos para reducir las
emisiones debidas a la deforestación y la degradación de los bosques, y de la
función de la conservación, la gestión sostenible de los bosques, y el aumento de
las reservas forestales de carbono en los países en desarrollo, así como de los
enfoques de política alternativos, como los que combinan la mitigación y la
adaptación para la gestión integral y sostenible de los bosques, reafirmando al
mismo tiempo la importancia de incentivar, cuando proceda, los beneficios no
relacionados con el carbono que se derivan de esos enfoques.
Artículo 6
1. Las Partes reconocen que algunas Partes podrán optar por cooperar
voluntariamente en la aplicación de sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel
nacional para lograr una mayor ambición en sus medidas de mitigación y
adaptación y promover el desarrollo sostenible y la integridad ambiental.
2. Cuando participen voluntariamente en enfoques cooperativos que entrañen el
uso de resultados de mitigación de transferencia internacional para cumplir con las
contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional, las Partes deberán promover el
desarrollo sostenible y garantizar la integridad ambiental y la transparencia,
también en la gobernanza, y aplicar una contabilidad robusta que asegure, entre
- 7-

--- Page 122 ---
otras cosas, la ausencia de doble cómputo, de conformidad con las orientaciones
que haya impartido la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes
en el presente Acuerdo.
3. La utilización de resultados de mitigación de transferencia internacional para
cumplir con las contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional en virtud del presente
Acuerdo será voluntaria y deberá ser autorizada por las Partes participantes.
4. Por el presente se establece un mecanismo para contribuir a la mitigación de
las emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero y apoyar el desarrollo sostenible, que
funcionará bajo la autoridad y la orientación de la Conferencia de las Partes en
calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo y podrá ser utilizado por las
Partes a título voluntario. El mecanismo será supervisado por un órgano que
designará la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo, y tendrá por objeto:
a) Promover la mitigación de las emisiones de gases de efecto
invernadero, fomentando al mismo tiempo el desarrollo sostenible;
b) Incentivar y facilitar la participación, en la mitigación de las
emisiones de gases de efecto invernadero, de las entidades públicas y privadas que
cuenten con la autorización de las Partes;
c) Contribuir a la reducción de los niveles de emisión en las Partes de
acogida, que se beneficiarán de actividades de mitigación por las que se generarán
reducciones de las emisiones que podrá utilizar también otra Parte para cumplir con
su contribución determinada a nivel nacional; y
d) Producir una mitigación global de las emisiones mundiales.
5. Las reducciones de las emisiones que genere el mecanismo a que se refiere
el párrafo 4 del presente artículo no deberán utilizarse para demostrar el
cumplimiento de la contribución determinada a nivel nacional de la Parte de
acogida, si otra Parte las utiliza para demostrar el cumplimiento de su propia
contribución determinada a nivel nacional.
6. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo velará por que una parte de los fondos devengados de las
actividades que se realicen en el marco del mecanismo a que se refiere el párrafo 4
- 8-

--- Page 123 ---
del presente artículo se utilice para sufragar los gastos administrativos y para
ayudar a las Partes que son países en desarrollo particularmente vulnerables a los
efectos adversos del cambio climático a hacer frente a los costos de la adaptación.
7. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo aprobará las normas, las modalidades y los procedimientos del
mecanismo a que se refiere el párrafo 4 del presente artículo en su primer período
de sesiones.
8. Las Partes reconocen la importancia de disponer de enfoques no
relacionados con el mercado que sean integrados, holísticos y equilibrados y que
les ayuden a implementar sus contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional, en el
contexto del desarrollo sostenible y de la erradicación de la pobreza y de manera
coordinada y eficaz, entre otras cosas mediante la mitigación, la adaptación, la
financiación, la transferencia de tecnología y el fomento de la capacidad, según
proceda. Estos enfoques tendrán por objeto:
a) Promover la ambición relativa a la mitigación y la adaptación;
b) Aumentar la participación de los sectores público y privado en la
aplicación de las contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional; y
c) Ofrecer oportunidades para la coordinación de los instrumentos y los
arreglos institucionales pertinentes.
9. Por el presente se define un marco para los enfoques de desarrollo sostenible
no relacionados con el mercado, a fin de promover los enfoques no relacionados
con el mercado a que se refiere el párrafo 8 del presente artículo.
Artículo 7
1. Por el presente, las Partes establecen el objetivo mundial relativo a la
adaptación, que consiste en aumentar la capacidad de adaptación, fortalecer la
resiliencia y reducir la vulnerabilidad al cambio climático con miras a contribuir al
desarrollo sostenible y lograr una respuesta de adaptación adecuada en el contexto
del objetivo referente a la temperatura que se menciona en el artículo 2.
2. Las Partes reconocen que la adaptación es un desafío mundial que incumbe a
todos, con dimensiones locales, subnacionales, nacionales, regionales e
- 9-

--- Page 124 ---
internacionales, y que es un componente fundamental de la respuesta mundial a
largo plazo frente al cambio climático y contribuye a esa respuesta, cuyo fin es
proteger a las personas, los medios de vida y los ecosistemas, teniendo en cuenta
las necesidades urgentes e inmediatas de las Partes que son países en desarrollo
particularmente vulnerables a los efectos adversos del cambio climático.
3. Los esfuerzos de adaptación que realicen las Partes que son países en
desarrollo serán reconocidos, con arreglo a las modalidades que apruebe la
Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente
Acuerdo en su primer período de sesiones.
4. Las Partes reconocen que la necesidad actual de adaptación es considerable,
que un incremento de los niveles de mitigación puede reducir la necesidad de
esfuerzos adicionales de adaptación, y que un aumento de las necesidades de
adaptación puede entrañar mayores costos de adaptación.
5. Las Partes reconocen que la labor de adaptación debería llevarse a cabo
mediante un enfoque que deje el control en manos de los países, responda a las
cuestiones de género y sea participativo y del todo transparente, tomando en
consideración a los grupos, comunidades y ecosistemas vulnerables, y que dicha
labor debería basarse e inspirarse en la mejor información científica disponible y,
cuando corresponda, en los conocimientos tradicionales, los conocimientos de los
pueblos indígenas y los sistemas de conocimientos locales, con miras a integrar la
adaptación en las políticas y medidas socioeconómicas y ambientales pertinentes,
cuando sea el caso.
6. Las Partes reconocen la importancia del apoyo prestado a los esfuerzos de
adaptación y de la cooperación internacional en esos esfuerzos, y la importancia de
que se tomen en consideración las necesidades de las Partes que son países en
desarrollo, en especial de las que son particularmente vulnerables a los efectos
adversos del cambio climático.
7. Las Partes deberían reforzar su cooperación para potenciar la labor de
adaptación, teniendo en cuenta el Marco de Adaptación de Cancún, entre otras
cosas con respecto a:
a) El intercambio de información, buenas prácticas, experiencias y
enseñanzas extraídas, en lo referente, según el caso, a la ciencia, la planificación,
las políticas y la aplicación de medidas de adaptación, entre otras cosas;
-10-

--- Page 125 ---
b) El fortalecimiento de los arreglos institucionales, incluidos los de la
Convención que estén al servicio del presente Acuerdo, para apoyar la síntesis de la
información y los conocimientos pertinentes, así como la provisión de orientación
y apoyo técnico a las Partes;
c) El fortalecimiento de los conocimientos científicos sobre el clima, con
inclusión de la investigación, la observación sistemática del sistema climático y los
sistemas de alerta temprana, de un modo que aporte información a los servicios
climáticos y apoye la adopción de decisiones;
d) La prestación de asistencia a las Partes que son países en desarrollo en
la determinación de las prácticas de adaptación eficaces, las necesidades de
adaptación, las prioridades, el apoyo prestado y recibido para las medidas y los
esfuerzos de adaptación, las dificultades y las carencias, de una manera que permita
promover las buenas prácticas; y
e) El aumento de la eficacia y la durabilidad de las medidas de
adaptación.
8. Se alienta a las organizaciones y organismos especializados de las Naciones
Unidas a que apoyen los esfuerzos de las Partes por llevar a efecto las medidas
mencionadas en el párrafo 7 del presente artículo, teniendo en cuenta lo dispuesto
en su párrafo 5.
9. Cada Parte deberá, cuando sea el caso, emprender procesos de planificación
de la adaptación y adoptar medidas, como la formulación o mejora de los planes,
políticas y/o contribuciones pertinentes, lo que podrá incluir:
a) La aplicación de medidas, iniciativas y/o esfuerzos de adaptación;
b) El proceso de formulación y ejecución de los planes nacionales de
adaptación;
c) La evaluación de los efectos del cambio climático y de la
vulnerabilidad a este, con miras a formular sus medidas prioritarias determinadas a
nivel nacional, teniendo en cuenta a las personas, los lugares y los ecosistemas
vulnerables;
-11-

--- Page 126 ---
d) La vigilancia y evaluación de los planes, políticas, programas y
medidas de adaptación y la extracción de las enseñanzas correspondientes; y
e) El aumento de la resiliencia de los sistemas socioeconómicos y
ecológicos, en particular mediante la diversificación económica y la gestión
sostenible de los recursos naturales.
10. Cada Parte debería, cuando proceda, presentar y actualizar periódicamente
una comunicación sobre la adaptación, que podrá incluir sus prioridades, sus
necesidades de aplicación y apoyo, sus planes y sus medidas, sin que ello suponga
una carga adicional para las Partes que son países en desarrollo.
11. La comunicación sobre la adaptación mencionada en el párrafo 10 del
presente artículo deberá, según el caso, presentarse o actualizarse periódicamente,
como un componente de otras comunicaciones o documentos, por ejemplo de un
plan nacional de adaptación, de la contribución determinada a nivel nacional
prevista en el artículo 4, párrafo 2, o de una comunicación nacional, o
conjuntamente con ellos.
12. La comunicación sobre la adaptación mencionada en el párrafo 10 del
presente artículo deberá inscribirse en un registro público que llevará la secretaría.
13. Se prestará un apoyo internacional continuo y reforzado a las Partes que son
países en desarrollo para la aplicación de los párrafos 7, 9, 10 y 11 del presente
artículo, de conformidad con lo dispuesto en los artículos 9, 10 y 11.
14. El balance mundial a que se refiere el artículo 14 deberá, entre otras cosas:
a) Reconocer los esfuerzos de adaptación de las Partes que son países en
desarrollo;
b) Mejorar la aplicación de las medidas de adaptación teniendo en cuenta
la comunicación sobre la adaptación mencionada en el párrafo 10 del presente
artículo;
c) Examinar la idoneidad y eficacia de la adaptación y el apoyo prestado
para ella; y
-12-

--- Page 127 ---
d) Examinar los progresos globales realizados en el logro del objetivo
mundial relativo a la adaptación que se enuncia en el párrafo 1 del presente
artículo.
Artículo 8
1. Las Partes reconocen la importancia de evitar, reducir al mínimo y afrontar
las pérdidas y los daños relacionados con los efectos adversos del cambio
climático, incluidos los fenómenos meteorológicos extremos y los fenómenos de
evolución lenta, y la contribución del desarrollo sostenible a la reducción del riesgo
de pérdidas y daños.
2. El Mecanismo Internacional de Varsovia para las Pérdidas y los Daños
relacionados con las Repercusiones del Cambio Climático estará sujeto a la
autoridad y la orientación de la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de
las Partes en el presente Acuerdo, y podrá mejorarse y fortalecerse según lo que
esta determine.
3. Las Partes deberían reforzar la comprensión, las medidas y el apoyo, de
manera cooperativa y facilitativa, entre otras cosas a través del Mecanismo
Internacional de Varsovia, cuando corresponda, con respecto a las pérdidas y los
daños relacionados con los efectos adversos del cambio climático.
4. Por consiguiente, las esferas en las que se debería actuar de manera
cooperativa y facilitativa para mejorar la comprensión, las medidas y el apoyo
podrán incluir:
a) Los sistemas de alerta temprana;
b) La preparación para situaciones de emergencia;
c) Los fenómenos de evolución lenta;
d) Los fenómenos que puedan producir pérdidas y daños permanentes e
irreversibles;
e) La evaluación y gestión integral del riesgo;
-13-

--- Page 128 ---
f) Los servicios de seguros de riesgos, la mancomunación del riesgo
climático y otras soluciones en el ámbito de los seguros;
g) Las pérdidas no económicas; y
h) La resiliencia de las comunidades, los medios de vida y los
ecosistemas.
5. El Mecanismo Internacional de Varsovia colaborará con los órganos y grupos
de expertos ya existentes en el marco del Acuerdo, así como con las organizaciones
y los órganos de expertos competentes que operen al margen de este.
Artículo 9
1. Las Partes que son países desarrollados deberán proporcionar recursos
financieros a las Partes que son países en desarrollo para prestarles asistencia tanto
en la mitigación como en la adaptación, y seguir cumpliendo así sus obligaciones
en virtud de la Convención.
2. Se alienta a otras Partes a que presten o sigan prestando ese apoyo de manera
voluntaria.
3. En el marco de un esfuerzo mundial, las Partes que son países desarrollados
deberían seguir encabezando los esfuerzos dirigidos a movilizar financiación para
el clima a partir de una gran variedad de fuentes, instrumentos y cauces, teniendo
en cuenta el importante papel de los fondos públicos, a través de diversas medidas,
como el apoyo a las estrategias controladas por los países, y teniendo en cuenta las
necesidades y prioridades de las Partes que son países en desarrollo. Esa
movilización de financiación para el clima debería representar una progresión con
respecto a los esfuerzos anteriores.
4. En el suministro de un mayor nivel de recursos financieros se debería buscar
un equilibrio entre la adaptación y la mitigación, teniendo en cuenta las estrategias
que determinen los países y las prioridades y necesidades de las Partes que son
países en desarrollo, en especial de las que son particularmente vulnerables a los
efectos adversos del cambio climático y tienen limitaciones importantes de
capacidad, como los países menos adelantados y los pequeños Estados insulares en
desarrollo, y tomando en consideración la necesidad de recursos públicos y a título
de donación para la labor de adaptación.
-14-

--- Page 129 ---
5. Las Partes que son países desarrollados deberán comunicar bienalmente
información indicativa, de carácter cuantitativo y cualitativo, en relación con lo
dispuesto en los párrafos 1 y 3 del presente artículo, según corresponda, con
inclusión de los niveles proyectados de recursos financieros públicos que se
suministrarán a las Partes que son países en desarrollo, cuando se conozcan. Se
alienta a las otras Partes que proporcionen recursos a que comuniquen bienalmente
esa información de manera voluntaria.
6. En el balance mundial de que trata el artículo 14 se tendrá en cuenta la
información pertinente que proporcionen las Partes que son países desarrollados
y/o los órganos del Acuerdo sobre los esfuerzos relacionados con la financiación
para el clima.
7. Las Partes que son países desarrollados deberán proporcionar bienalmente
información transparente y coherente sobre el apoyo para las Partes que son países
en desarrollo que se haya prestado y movilizado mediante intervenciones públicas,
de conformidad con las modalidades, los procedimientos y las directrices que
apruebe la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo en su primer período de sesiones, como se establece en el artículo
13, párrafo 13. Se alienta a otras Partes a que hagan lo mismo.
8. El Mecanismo Financiero de la Convención, con las entidades encargadas de
su funcionamiento, constituirá el mecanismo financiero del presente Acuerdo.
9. Las instituciones al servicio del presente Acuerdo, incluidas las entidades
encargadas del funcionamiento del Mecanismo Financiero de la Convención,
procurarán ofrecer a las Partes que son países en desarrollo, en particular a los
países menos adelantados y los pequeños Estados insulares en desarrollo, un acceso
eficiente a los recursos financieros mediante procedimientos de aprobación
simplificados y un mayor apoyo para la preparación, en el contexto de sus planes y
estrategias nacionales sobre el clima.
Artículo 10
1. Las Partes comparten una visión a largo plazo sobre la importancia de hacer
plenamente efectivos el desarrollo y la transferencia de tecnología para mejorar la
resiliencia al cambio climático y reducir las emisiones de gases de efecto
invernadero.
-15-

--- Page 130 ---
2. Las Partes, teniendo en cuenta la importancia de la tecnología para la puesta
en práctica de medidas de mitigación y adaptación en virtud del presente Acuerdo y
tomando en consideración los esfuerzos de difusión y despliegue de tecnología que
ya se están realizando, deberán fortalecer su acción cooperativa en el desarrollo y
la transferencia de tecnología.
3. El Mecanismo Tecnológico establecido en el marco de la Convención estará
al servicio del presente Acuerdo.
4. Por el presente se establece un marco tecnológico que impartirá orientación
general al Mecanismo Tecnológico en su labor de promover y facilitar el
fortalecimiento del desarrollo y la transferencia de tecnología a fin de respaldar la
aplicación del presente Acuerdo, con miras a hacer realidad la visión a largo plazo
enunciada en el párrafo 1 de este artículo.
5. Para dar una respuesta mundial eficaz y a largo plazo al cambio climático y
promover el crecimiento económico y el desarrollo sostenible es indispensable
posibilitar, alentar y acelerar la innovación. Este esfuerzo será respaldado como
corresponda, entre otros por el Mecanismo Tecnológico y, con medios financieros,
por el Mecanismo Financiero de la Convención, a fin de impulsar los enfoques
colaborativos en la labor de investigación y desarrollo y de facilitar el acceso de las
Partes que son países en desarrollo a la tecnología, en particular en las primeras
etapas del ciclo tecnológico.
6. Se prestará apoyo, también de carácter financiero, a las Partes que son países
en desarrollo para la aplicación del presente artículo, entre otras cosas para
fortalecer la acción cooperativa en el desarrollo y la transferencia de tecnología en
las distintas etapas del ciclo tecnológico, con miras a lograr un equilibrio entre el
apoyo destinado a la mitigación y a la adaptación. En el balance mundial a que se
refiere el artículo 14 se tendrá en cuenta la información que se comunique sobre los
esfuerzos relacionados con el apoyo al desarrollo de tecnología y a su transferencia
a las Partes que son países en desarrollo.
Artículo 11
1. El fomento de la capacidad en el marco del presente Acuerdo debería
mejorar la capacidad y las competencias de las Partes que son países en desarrollo,
en particular de los que tienen menos capacidad, como los países menos
adelantados, y los que son particularmente vulnerables a los efectos adversos del
cambio climático, como los pequeños Estados insulares en desarrollo, para llevar a
-16-

--- Page 131 ---
cabo una acción eficaz frente al cambio climático, entre otras cosas, para aplicar
medidas de adaptación y mitigación, y debería facilitar el desarrollo, la difusión y
el despliegue de tecnología, el acceso a financiación para el clima, los aspectos
pertinentes de la educación, formación y sensibilización del público y la
comunicación de información de forma transparente, oportuna y exacta.
2. El fomento de la capacidad debería estar bajo el control de los países,
basarse en las necesidades nacionales y responder a ellas, y fomentar la
implicación de las Partes, en particular de las que son países en desarrollo,
incluyendo en los planos nacional, subnacional y local. El fomento de la capacidad
debería guiarse por las lecciones aprendidas, también en las actividades en esta
esfera realizadas en el marco de la Convención, y debería ser un proceso eficaz e
iterativo, que sea participativo y transversal y que responda a las cuestiones de
género.
3. Todas las Partes deberían cooperar para mejorar la capacidad de las Partes
que son países en desarrollo de aplicar el presente Acuerdo. Las Partes que son
países desarrollados deberían aumentar el apoyo prestado a las actividades de
fomento de la capacidad en las Partes que son países en desarrollo.
4. Todas las Partes que aumenten la capacidad de las Partes que son países en
desarrollo de aplicar el presente Acuerdo mediante enfoques regionales, bilaterales
y multilaterales, entre otros, deberán informar periódicamente sobre esas
actividades o medidas de fomento de la capacidad. Las Partes que son países en
desarrollo deberían comunicar periódicamente los progresos realizados en la
ejecución de todo plan, política, actividad o medida de fomento de la capacidad
que apliquen para dar efecto al presente Acuerdo.
5. Las actividades de fomento de la capacidad se potenciarán mediante los
arreglos institucionales apropiados para apoyar la aplicación del presente Acuerdo,
incluidos los arreglos de ese tipo que se hayan establecido en el marco de la
Convención y estén al servicio del Acuerdo. La Conferencia de las Partes en
calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo examinará y adoptará una
decisión sobre los arreglos institucionales iniciales para el fomento de la capacidad
en su primer período de sesiones.
Artículo 12
Las Partes deberán cooperar en la adopción de las medidas que correspondan
para mejorar la educación, la formación, la sensibilización y participación del
-17-

--- Page 132 ---
público y el acceso público a la información sobre el cambio climático, teniendo
presente la importancia de estas medidas para mejorar la acción en el marco del
presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 13
1. Con el fin de fomentar la confianza mutua y de promover la aplicación
efectiva, por el presente se establece un marco de transparencia reforzado para las
medidas y el apoyo, dotado de flexibilidad para tener en cuenta las diferentes
capacidades de las Partes y basado en la experiencia colectiva.
2. El marco de transparencia ofrecerá flexibilidad a las Partes que son países en
desarrollo que lo necesiten, teniendo en cuenta sus capacidades, para la aplicación
de las disposiciones del presente artículo. Esa flexibilidad se reflejará en las
modalidades, los procedimientos y las directrices a que se hace referencia en el
párrafo 13 del presente artículo.
3. El marco de transparencia tomará como base y reforzará los arreglos para la
transparencia previstos en la Convención, reconociendo las circunstancias
especiales de los países menos adelantados y los pequeños Estados insulares en
desarrollo, se aplicará de manera facilitadora, no intrusiva y no punitiva,
respetando la soberanía nacional, y evitará imponer una carga indebida a las Partes.
4. Los arreglos para la transparencia previstos en la Convención, como las
comunicaciones nacionales, los informes bienales y los informes bienales de
actualización, el proceso de evaluación y examen internacional y el proceso de
consulta y análisis internacional, formarán parte de la experiencia que se tendrá en
cuenta para elaborar las modalidades, los procedimientos y las directrices previstos
en el párrafo 13 del presente artículo.
5. El propósito del marco de transparencia de las medidas es dar una visión
clara de las medidas adoptadas para hacer frente al cambio climático a la luz del
objetivo de la Convención, enunciado en su artículo 2, entre otras cosas
aumentando la claridad y facilitando el seguimiento de los progresos realizados en
relación con las contribuciones determinadas a nivel nacional de cada una de las
Partes en virtud del artículo 4, y de las medidas de adaptación adoptadas por las
Partes en virtud del artículo 7, incluidas las buenas prácticas, las prioridades, las
necesidades y las carencias, como base para el balance mundial a que se refiere el
artículo 14.
-18-

--- Page 133 ---
6. El propósito del marco de transparencia del apoyo es dar una visión clara del
apoyo prestado o recibido por las distintas Partes en el contexto de las medidas
para hacer frente al cambio climático previstas en los artículos 4, 7, 9, 10 y 11 y
ofrecer, en lo posible, un panorama completo del apoyo financiero agregado que se
haya prestado, como base para el balance mundial a que se refiere el artículo 14.
7. Cada Parte deberá proporcionar periódicamente la siguiente información:
a) Un informe sobre el inventario nacional de las emisiones
antropógenas por las fuentes y la absorción antropógena por los sumideros de gases
de efecto invernadero, elaborado utilizando las metodologías para las buenas
prácticas aceptadas por el Grupo Intergubernamental de Expertos sobre el Cambio
Climático que haya aprobado la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de
las Partes en el presente Acuerdo; y
b) La información necesaria para hacer un seguimiento de los progresos
alcanzados en la aplicación y el cumplimiento de su contribución determinada a
nivel nacional en virtud del artículo 4.
8. Cada Parte debería proporcionar también información relativa a los efectos
del cambio climático y a la labor de adaptación con arreglo al artículo 7, según
proceda.
9. Las Partes que son países desarrollados deberán, y las otras Partes que
proporcionen apoyo deberían, suministrar información sobre el apoyo en forma de
financiación, transferencia de tecnología y fomento de la capacidad prestado a las
Partes que son países en desarrollo de conformidad con lo dispuesto en los
artículos 9, 10 y 11.
10. Las Partes que son países en desarrollo deberían proporcionar información
sobre el apoyo en forma de financiación, transferencia de tecnología y fomento de
la capacidad requerido y recibido con arreglo a lo dispuesto en los artículos 9, 10
y 11.
11. La información que comunique cada Parte conforme a lo solicitado en los
párrafos 7 y 9 del presente artículo se someterá a un examen técnico por expertos,
de conformidad con la decisión 1/CP.21. Para las Partes que son países en
desarrollo que lo requieran a la luz de sus capacidades, el proceso de examen
incluirá asistencia para determinar las necesidades de fomento de la capacidad.
Además, cada Parte participará en un examen facilitador y multilateral de los
-19-

--- Page 134 ---
progresos alcanzados en sus esfuerzos relacionados con lo dispuesto en el artículo
9, así como en la aplicación y el cumplimiento de su respectiva contribución
determinada a nivel nacional.
12. El examen técnico por expertos previsto en el presente párrafo consistirá en
la consideración del apoyo prestado por la Parte interesada, según corresponda, y
de la aplicación y el cumplimiento por esta de su contribución determinada a nivel
nacional. El examen también determinará los ámbitos en que la Parte interesada
pueda mejorar, e incluirá un examen de la coherencia de la información con las
modalidades, procedimientos y directrices a que se hace referencia en el párrafo 13
del presente artículo, teniendo en cuenta la flexibilidad otorgada a esa Parte con
arreglo al párrafo 2 del presente artículo. En el examen se prestará especial
atención a las respectivas capacidades y circunstancias nacionales de las Partes que
son países en desarrollo.
13. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo, en su primer período de sesiones, aprovechando la experiencia
adquirida con los arreglos relativos a la transparencia en el marco de la Convención
y definiendo con más detalle las disposiciones del presente artículo, aprobará
modalidades, procedimientos y directrices comunes, según proceda, para la
transparencia de las medidas y el apoyo.
14. Se prestará apoyo a los países en desarrollo para la aplicación del presente
artículo.
15. Se prestará también apoyo continuo para aumentar la capacidad de
transparencia de las Partes que son países en desarrollo.
Artículo 14
1. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo hará periódicamente un balance de la aplicación del presente
Acuerdo para determinar el avance colectivo en el cumplimiento de su propósito y
de sus objetivos a largo plazo ("el balance mundial"), y lo hará de manera global y
facilitadora, examinando la mitigación, la adaptación, los medios de aplicación y el
apoyo, y a la luz de la equidad y de la mejor información científica disponible.
2. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo hará su primer balance mundial en 2023 y a partir de entonces, a
menos que decida otra cosa, lo hará cada cinco años.
-20-

--- Page 135 ---
3. El resultado del balance mundial aportará información a las Partes para que
actualicen y mejoren, del modo que determinen a nivel nacional, sus medidas y su
apoyo de conformidad con las disposiciones pertinentes del presente Acuerdo, y
para que aumenten la cooperación internacional en la acción relacionada con el
clima.
Artículo 15
1. Por el presente se establece un mecanismo para facilitar la aplicación y
promover el cumplimiento de las disposiciones del presente Acuerdo.
2. El mecanismo mencionado en el párrafo 1 del presente artículo consistirá en
un comité compuesto por expertos y de carácter facilitador, que funcionará de
manera transparente, no contenciosa y no punitiva. El comité prestará especial
atención a las respectivas circunstancias y capacidades nacionales de las Partes.
3. El comité funcionará con arreglo a las modalidades y los procedimientos que
apruebe en su primer período de sesiones la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de
reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo, a la que presentará informes anuales.
Artículo 16
1. La Conferencia de las Partes, que es el órgano supremo de la Convención,
actuará como reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo.
2. Las Partes en la Convención que no sean partes en el presente Acuerdo
podrán participar como observadoras en las deliberaciones de cualquier período de
sesiones de la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo. Cuando la Conferencia de las Partes actúe como reunión de las
Partes en el presente Acuerdo, las decisiones en el ámbito del Acuerdo serán
adoptadas únicamente por las Partes en el presente Acuerdo.
3. Cuando la Conferencia de las Partes actúe como reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo, todo miembro de la Mesa de la Conferencia de las Partes que
represente a una Parte en la Convención que a la fecha no sea parte en el presente
Acuerdo será reemplazado por otro miembro que será elegido de entre las Partes en
el presente Acuerdo y por ellas mismas.
-21-

--- Page 136 ---
4. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo examinará regularmente la aplicación del presente Acuerdo y,
conforme a su mandato, tomará las decisiones necesarias para promover su
aplicación eficaz. Cumplirá las funciones que le asigne el presente Acuerdo y:
a) Establecerá los órganos subsidiarios que considere necesarios para la
aplicación del presente Acuerdo; y
b) Desempeñará las demás funciones que sean necesarias para la
aplicación del presente Acuerdo.
5. El reglamento de la Conferencia de las Partes y los procedimientos
financieros aplicados en relación con la Convención se aplicarán mutatis mutandis
en relación con el presente Acuerdo, a menos que decida otra cosa por consenso la
Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente
Acuerdo.
6. La secretaría convocará el primer período de sesiones de la Conferencia de
las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo en conjunto
con el primer período de sesiones de la Conferencia de las Partes que se programe
después de la fecha de entrada en vigor del presente Acuerdo. Los siguientes
períodos ordinarios de sesiones de la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de
reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo se celebrarán en conjunto con los
períodos ordinarios de sesiones de la Conferencia de las Partes, a menos que decida
otra cosa la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo.
7. Los períodos extraordinarios de sesiones de la Conferencia de las Partes en
calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo se celebrarán cada vez que
la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente
Acuerdo lo considere necesario, o cuando una de las Partes lo solicite por escrito,
siempre que dentro de los seis meses siguientes a la fecha en que la secretaría haya
transmitido a las Partes la solicitud, esta reciba el apoyo de al menos un tercio de
las Partes.
8. Las Naciones Unidas, sus organismos especializados y el Organismo
Internacional de Energía Atómica, así como todo Estado miembro de esas
organizaciones u observador ante ellas que no sea parte en la Convención, podrán
estar representados como observadores en los períodos de sesiones de la
Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente
-22-

--- Page 137 ---
Acuerdo. Todo órgano u organismo, sea nacional o internacional, gubernamental o
no gubernamental, que sea competente en los asuntos de que trata el presente
Acuerdo y que haya informado a la secretaría de su deseo de estar representado
como observador en un período de sesiones de la Conferencia de las Partes en
calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo podrá ser admitido como
observador a menos que se oponga a ello un tercio de las Partes presentes. La
admisión y participación de los observadores se regirán por el reglamento a que se
refiere el párrafo 5 de este artículo.
Artículo 17
1. La secretaría establecida por el artículo 8 de la Convención desempeñará la
función de secretaría del presente Acuerdo.
2. El artículo 8, párrafo 2, de la Convención, sobre las funciones de la
secretaría, y el artículo 8, párrafo 3, de la Convención, sobre las disposiciones para
su funcionamiento, se aplicarán mutatis mutandis al presente Acuerdo. La
secretaría ejercerá además las funciones que se le asignen en el marco del presente
Acuerdo y que le confíe la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las
Partes en el presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 18
1. El Órgano Subsidiario de Asesoramiento Científico y Tecnológico y el
Órgano Subsidiario de Ejecución establecidos por los artículos 9 y 10 de la
Convención actuarán como Órgano Subsidiario de Asesoramiento Científico y
Tecnológico y Órgano Subsidiario de Ejecución del presente Acuerdo,
respectivamente. Las disposiciones de la Convención sobre el funcionamiento de
estos dos órganos se aplicarán mutatis mutandis al presente Acuerdo. Los períodos
de sesiones del Órgano Subsidiario de Asesoramiento Científico y Tecnológico y
del Órgano Subsidiario de Ejecución del presente Acuerdo se celebrarán
conjuntamente con los del Órgano Subsidiario de Asesoramiento Científico y
Tecnológico y el Órgano Subsidiario de Ejecución de la Convención,
respectivamente.
2. Las Partes en la Convención que no sean partes en el presente Acuerdo
podrán participar como observadoras en las deliberaciones de cualquier período de
sesiones de los órganos subsidiarios. Cuando los órganos subsidiarios actúen como
órganos subsidiarios del presente Acuerdo, las decisiones en el ámbito del Acuerdo
serán adoptadas únicamente por las Partes en el Acuerdo.
-23-

--- Page 138 ---
3. Cuando los órganos subsidiarios establecidos por los artículos 9 y 10 de la
Convención ejerzan sus funciones respecto de cuestiones de interés para el presente
Acuerdo, todo miembro de la mesa de los órganos subsidiarios que represente a una
Parte en la Convención que a esa fecha no sea parte en el Acuerdo será
reemplazado por otro miembro que será elegido de entre las Partes en el Acuerdo y
por ellas mismas.
Artículo 19
1. Los órganos subsidiarios u otros arreglos institucionales establecidos por la
Convención o en el marco de esta que no se mencionan en el presente Acuerdo
estarán al servicio de este si así lo decide la Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de
reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo. La Conferencia de las Partes en
calidad de reunión de las Partes en el presente Acuerdo especificará las funciones
que deberán ejercer esos órganos subsidiarios o arreglos.
2. La Conferencia de las Partes en calidad de reunión de las Partes en el
presente Acuerdo podrá impartir orientaciones adicionales a esos órganos
subsidiarios y arreglos institucionales.
Artículo 20
1. El presente Acuerdo estará abierto a la firma y sujeto a la ratificación,
aceptación o aprobación de los Estados y de las organizaciones regionales de
integración económica que sean Partes en la Convención. Quedará abierto a la
firma en la Sede de las Naciones Unidas en Nueva York del 22 de abril de 2016 al
21 de abril de 2017, y a la adhesión a partir del día siguiente a aquel en que quede
cerrado a la firma. Los instrumentos de ratificación, aceptación, aprobación o
adhesión se depositarán en poder del Depositario.
2. Las organizaciones regionales de integración económica que pasen a ser
Partes en el presente Acuerdo sin que ninguno de sus Estados miembros lo sea
quedarán sujetas a todas las obligaciones dimanantes del Acuerdo. En el caso de las
organizaciones regionales de integración económica que tengan uno o más Estados
miembros que sean Partes en el presente Acuerdo, la organización y sus Estados
miembros determinarán sus respectivas responsabilidades en el cumplimiento de
las obligaciones que les incumban en virtud del presente Acuerdo. En tales casos,
la organización y los Estados miembros no podrán ejercer simultáneamente
derechos conferidos por el Acuerdo.
-24-

--- Page 139 ---
3. Las organizaciones regionales de integración económica indicarán en sus
instrumentos de ratificación, aceptación, aprobación o adhesión su grado de
competencia con respecto a las cuestiones regidas por el presente Acuerdo. Esas
organizaciones comunicarán asimismo cualquier modificación sustancial de su
ámbito de competencia al Depositario, que a su vez la comunicará a las Partes.
Artículo 21
1. El presente Acuerdo entrará en vigor al trigésimo día contado desde la fecha
en que no menos de 55 Partes en la Convención, cuyas emisiones estimadas
representen globalmente por lo menos un 55% del total de las emisiones mundiales
de gases de efecto invernadero, hayan depositado sus instrumentos de ratificación,
aceptación, aprobación o adhesión.
2. A los efectos exclusivamente del párrafo 1 del presente artículo, por "total de
las emisiones mundiales de gases de efecto invernadero" se entenderá la cantidad
más actualizada que las Partes en la Convención hayan comunicado en la fecha de
aprobación del presente Acuerdo, o antes de esa fecha.
3. Para cada Estado u organización regional de integración económica que
ratifique, acepte o apruebe el presente Acuerdo o se adhiera a él una vez reunidas
las condiciones para la entrada en vigor establecidas en el párrafo 1 de este
artículo, el Acuerdo entrará en vigor al trigésimo día contado desde la fecha en que
el Estado o la organización regional de integración económica haya depositado su
instrumento de ratificación, aceptación, aprobación o adhesión.
4. A los efectos del párrafo 1 del presente artículo, el instrumento que deposite
una organización regional de integración económica no contará además de los que
hayan depositado sus Estados miembros.
Artículo 22
Las disposiciones del artículo 15 de la Convención sobre la aprobación de
enmiendas a la Convención se aplicarán mutatis mutandis al presente Acuerdo.
-25-

--- Page 140 ---
Artículo 23
1. Las disposiciones del artículo 16 de la Convención sobre la aprobación y
enmienda de los anexos de la Convención se aplicarán mutatis mutandis al presente
Acuerdo.
2. Los anexos del Acuerdo formarán parte integrante de este y, a menos que se
disponga expresamente otra cosa, toda referencia al presente Acuerdo constituirá al
mismo tiempo una referencia a cualquiera de sus anexos. Esos anexos solo podrán
contener listas, formularios y cualquier otro material descriptivo que trate de
asuntos científicos, técnicos, de procedimiento o administrativos.
Artículo 24
Las disposiciones del artículo 14 de la Convención sobre el arreglo de
controversias se aplicarán mutatis mutandis al presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 25
1. Con excepción de lo dispuesto en el párrafo 2 del presente artículo, cada
Parte tendrá un voto.
2. Las organizaciones regionales de integración económica, en los asuntos de
su competencia, ejercerán su derecho de voto con un número de votos igual al
número de sus Estados miembros que sean Partes en el presente Acuerdo. Esas
organizaciones no ejercerán su derecho de voto si cualquiera de sus Estados
miembros ejerce el suyo, y viceversa.
Artículo 26
El Secretario General de las Naciones Unidas será el Depositario del
presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 27
No se podrán formular reservas al presente Acuerdo.
-26-

--- Page 141 ---
Artículo 28
1. Cualquiera de las Partes podrá denunciar el presente Acuerdo mediante
notificación por escrito al Depositario en cualquier momento después de que hayan
transcurrido tres años a partir de la fecha de entrada en vigor del Acuerdo para esa
Parte.
2. La denuncia surtirá efecto al cabo de un año contado desde la fecha en que el
Depositario haya recibido la notificación correspondiente o, posteriormente, en la
fecha que se indique en la notificación.
3. Se considerará que la Parte que denuncia la Convención denuncia asimismo
el presente Acuerdo.
Artículo 29
El original del presente Acuerdo, cuyos textos en árabe, chino, español,
francés, inglés y ruso son igualmente auténticos, se depositará en poder del
Secretario General de las Naciones Unidas.
HECHO en París el día doce de diciembre de dos mil quince.
EN TESTIMONIO DE LO CUAL los infrascritos, debidamente autorizados a esos
efectos, han firmado el presente Acuerdo.

--- Page 143 ---
Yn 3¿iii
. (JLiJ'yi IJla j «Jot^ii ^Mi ¿^vyi ó
Y V Oidi
.JUJVI IJl& ^íp ol]áÁ¿ jtlJül jj^ M
YA Sili!
Ó*>C cuJJ LÌ <J>LJ»JVI iJuti ^i) oí - ^
.£¿,5jJl J,! ^liT JL^jÌtì ^jW Ó^-àj^l ¿Iii jJj ^JJIj y ol
^j-äJj ^¿jLj »I J_LP J^äJl iJufc ubt-Ji iLáj IJ-j ~ Y
¿Jäj ^Jjlj ^ J' (-jIÄ^J^Ij U
.(iUJ'yi iJu* ^ L¿íjÍ L^vwU jpJ ÄJUl^i ¿r* ? çgî - V
Y ^ Oidi
J 4 _ _ * Ì > (3 (^JLJI CtiLiJ'yi IÜL-Ä J_V=>Î
(JjL-^Sj
. «Jlsxill ^UJi ùy1^ ci-^ CÄ^^vJ ^jjJlj 2- 0J*Jl j A^^vsJl j
¿^jlSi 2^1 y» jy^j^jjj^l Ójjl^ ^y» J^P ^J^i (3 (3 J^r"
.(JLàj^l iJLfc jl¡ cjj^s^J láJs> ùj-àii calibi il)jil ^JlSj li Ijl^ij
-26-

--- Page 144 ---
Y Y Siili
(_r ip o^La-jdl ¿L^ic-I óLio à^ila;^] ^ \ o ¡bLil ç»Lx>-Î JLiìVi lJu* ^^
,4ÍjÜJ«J ç»JJJ La ^JjJ 3_j5L¿JV\
tr Siili
4-jiiryi ^ i S^LLI C<UJJL*J L» JJ-uj ^ ijuj^i
¿¡J* ¡¿^ - \
.L^LJJJJ ÄJLSJVI olii^ ¿LipIJ ÄlLed!
(Jl SjLiI JiCjUj j (ÍLÁJ^I IJLÄ o Lai y> - Y
j ./?TS"j .tiiJi ^j-ií- äj-IJ-V (JI^: ji La t4jLöi^ cuijJl oli 3 SjLil (Jláj^l
ji <L<JLP Äjt^s Li ^ylvsj ^lls olì SiLa <_¿lJ CJIJLJUO^IJ j^JIJÁÍI ^ip CJ12Íjll ÔJL»
.Äjjbl jl jl ^¡ISj
Y t Siili
ùLio S-JUj^l J^a ^ i ä
¿111 etilici l'i-ft i.P J-Jaj
L5
.olpjLil
Y o Siili
^•^a Y SjJLäil (3 4—lPJ- j </1\a La ¿LiX^L t Jjs-Ij O1 2J& (J^^ ^J^ — ^
.Siili «Jlä
1 (3 SJLS-IJJI JJL~1I (3 t^^oJi^l ^iL^i^íl J^lScül ^jLC - Y
Ü_A (3 <_S|^Jaî ^^ ¿Jl ^UopSII Li¿.XjtS j L^ olj-v^l J-a C~¡J-y3iíl (3
î-UâpVI Liji ^ Ç^î C—^jLa Iii Cjj-v^I (3 2-JgJ.I ai_A ^jLC VJ .JLáj^l
.^«SCxJlj ^^SvjJIJ ti g ä->-
-25-

--- Page 145 ---
ù ^i Ol ö(jLáj^/l I-L& ¡J LiJo ^c-^u" ¡ S ^— Y
Jj Ij-Ä ^is- ÁJyil JSC aJ li^i? Í.L¿pS/1 JjjJt ¿y i¿\
Ii Jb cU^pSíl U j^ ¿y jî Ju-IJ jjSC ¿Jl J^lSÚJl oLja-'-»
y:. LiUlyJl cbí L^. J-T oÜjJ—^ s-U^p^íl Lij.>j a_Ja.dl jju aj\Jü^\ IJia (3
j C—Íj (j (j-jLe OÍ üUkpSfl JJJLJ!J S^JáuJLj M to^U-l OJLA (3j . JLÄJVI lJu¡>
. (JLáj^l !JL4> jJT. U jjb-
1—ijaí jl Lg-ájJ i iJ
.¿Liftll IJLA ¿Jl JjL^ÍL) jJ*I¡ L^J l g
Y»J-Ä- JJJLJU" Ç$L) 0JJJL-J E¿J-JL L-¿2JÍ AI_A J
I ci^i
3¿lll
li^la O 0 J¿> V l» f Lï jü ¿u^l í>JJI (3 JUïVl IÒA ¿L¿J ÎJuj - \
oLÎUj^i J ^i ¿r* J 00 ¿r* ^ ^ ^J^1 <3 Wi cJ ^^
jí l^láitJ^» jí lijj jl iijSwa tÄijjJl Cjljl¿ ^ áJ.L*JI
(jg—í-^—ói ¡oLil «J Ä \ ij áiiJ «:>J~l_Í¿I ^Ij—pSIS — Y
Si e- (.(,
¿s JLáJVi tú—» JL^ipI ¿íjL; J SJtLH C-jLoÍkJI ¿jJ^Í 4jlíjJ( CJIjlp Á-lUJl ob'UJ^I
.¿jjÜI JJ jf ÁJLL'^I 3 ^US1!
JjJLyüj cS^L^ái J-4^ j\ 2jJ-S3 3u_wwJl) cilici ¿l¿j IJLJ - f
t
(3 5¿JL¿I ¿LÁJI Í-J-J JSjj->io flijJl Juo a_JI _jî jil yJ ¿\Jü J JUjVÍ IÓA ^JS-
J^lS^Jl jí áJjjJl
I g " .>>'.1 j| l^JLáíly» jl liJ*t jl «Áa ^«-dí^i
J_«l^J y di—Vf Líí tá¿LÍ.I «JlJk \ ysl^—¿Sí - t
.Í.L¿IPS/I liJ^ i—jUr ^ jil ¿ij^LvaJJ 4ÍU¿j ^Jil
-24-

--- Page 146 ---
iSjLsj ÙÎ JliîVt ló-A 3 IiiJaî cu—J ¿Jl <lJIi;^! (3 <JM^JsSU - Y
ÙLjLPyîJl OLxtJíl J-OJÍJ .ÙÇjPj—¿Jl oljj.5 âjji Ç^î jLo-pî i il^
juryi iJLA y. ¿u¿i o
o i jjji\
,4ÍIJh\ ^Js- LiíJ
4_JIíj"^I ¿r4 ^ ' J ^ Ov3^ y- óULivdl ùLup jÀJl OLaJ.1 ^jLc U_Up - f
¿ryl-A ^ ^yaUx^o kJUj^I IJjS 2JLljcil JjLJ.1 U^l^«
j^sS- J,f¡'£
j - ( J L à j ^I Ii.«» ¿ LiJ* cJjil dU¿ 3 OjÍ^J ^ J Li^is ¿^P
^ JLb-N/l IIa J <_}|^ty
\ ^ Siili
ál_¿uil a^vw-jil oLJjJl ¡y UjlP jf ^pjjiil e->UJ>l JLáJ^I IJla - ^
ßy jly ilxi (JLsJ^I lJus> j L$Jl jUuil dlL" lJMJ^ ÍLajÜsI ¡j j\ ¡LJLLrVI
J^bJI <_>ljJfS/l J .JLÀJ^fl |J_A (3 ¡_>l^JsS1! ^L^rl Jj J-^l j-lfS/l
4_jPyJl OLJÜÍI SJL_Ä LJ^ .h"-» ¿Jl ^ gil JLiJNt l-i-A (3 ól^Jp^l -US—ví»JJ
.oLJyül j!
0Î JUjVI IJLÄ 3 (.31 j-^Vl jj^ - Y
jil oLJ j yJl oljuil o ài» obLàj^l ^ SwXj j»
Y * oidi
J JWLJI 2 ai I J-« jl J J—¿ jl V^J J (jl ¿J^l IJ » JJ T__J V ; ¿J — \
3 (jLÁj^l jj i_->L; ^-¿JJ .4_JL¿JVI <3 ^S/l ^j-^Ji^l J_aÜKiJl j
/ai—^J Y 'I Ji Y > n Jj^î/ùl—Y Y ¿r— Sj-sáJl 3 S^^Ll ^ Vl
¿jjU JLJI Jl ^ IJLupI JLL-Vl IJU5> Jl uL dJJ¿
rj j j . Y • W Jjjjí
jJl (_£jJ ^La-vzJ^I jl SlÁíl jil jl J jl (JjJi y2lil ij JJJ . JJ "-r'^í J^i
-23-

--- Page 147 ---
y^ai c^ujjJi uijaju ijjjJi ÄJITjJij Li^is'jj so^ii ¿fs. - A
4i_yaj jJijf Ij-ij^ó oí cÁ-iLáJ^I (J i_¿ljJöS/I LgJ^-i ùï^jdl jí j-sap 3-!ji ¿r^
j ^j . JSLií^l IJLÄ J jJs^l jj J-*^ ßy* oljjj j 51 y
oli jl j5s>- í4_Jji jl C-sJlS' J.ItSjlS'j jl ÄJLA ÁjJ Jj-i
JJ^OS-
AJJÜÍ 0jiC" ó! (J :P2J uSíl OJ^LÍ
;
CíjLjij'yi !JL_A (3 j-^Vl ^L^r! a.JJ J_«l*Jl j-US/l jiJ-L SJJÍ <3 y
(juílJj_¿ j . JiS'i ^ 1 <3!^S1! Ó-U di!i jl L»
p-f^"jLS^J S j¿>\J~ ^Js- Js
.3¿li! AJlä ¿r» O S^liJl <3 t$Jl jUui! ^^UIAJI
W 8¿Ul
. cilici IJla ÁJUÍ A Sili! < y :. SLi-il ÄJl«Si! J**j - ^
A Sili! ¿y» Y Sj-làil c4JjJjJ U Jj-UJ ^ e JU;^! lia ^^ j^J - Y
o L j j L io 4_¿Uj^I A SiLil V S_ Á¿Jl '^l^o-íj cSJU^I Ju'U¿j jLio ÄJUi^! j»
/
y. L$Jl Sjll^J.1 ¿JUi Jl b ajuS1! ^jLcj 2Jl«Síl s-bSl
4P ji!
<3 i_it^-USí! ^ L ^l y. d>\j-bHI L$Jl U j ^. ¿Jl ^L^ilj JLáíVI li-»
.cilici lia
Ï A Sili!
OLíL^uil JLJLSLS ¡LPjjiil 2JLA!J j iJ S^^JuJl SJJJU^Ü 2LPjà!I ÄJUA! J-»J«J — ^
y¿\ c Jl jjJl ip (. U-^i-^Ll 2_JL¿J^I \ » J ^ ¿^JiLl! jJT.
L5
fri all 4_äJjci! 2_JLaJ*yi j . JláJ^I liá ¿^lysUi-l üuijdJ S^pjá!| 4ìJ>! j ySCJl j
Sjuì! OLPLOJ^»-! OIjjì JLâjuj .«ÜjUjJ ^j-i L-4 '(JL-SJ^I li-» ^ÌP (jjiijAI ¿jyL»
ù l ( J I ì j ^I IÌ4 jçutfUi-l JujiuiJ jkSi Äijilj Ä^jJy^jJlj 2L*Jl*JI SjjJu^i! ¡LPyü!
¿^jl^UL! 2l_jPji]! j 2Ljspjjj^iJ!j 4_^Jjti! 2l_;P^¿i! 2_SJÌ! OLPL^I
.JIjxJl Js. aJlij-^L
-22-

--- Page 148 ---
¿L¿l OjiC i Jlij'Vl IIA (3 31^Js-S/I ^Lo^rl 31^JsSü Joy LJLLPJ .JUJ^I
.¿jlij'VI IIA 3 31Jsí J^A jjJJl AíUkpÍ ^IP USj JjLL'VI II A y, oljlyJl
^ U ^J iJLíj'VI IIa 3 31>Síl y, 31J^S/I y j» J-»*. L-Up - V
cijJl dU¿ 3 Oj-^ó V á-JLL'VI 3 L i 3 1 ^ S íl ¿UopÍ j^ip oí jp
.L^UJ JLL'VI IIA (3 31^Sfl 3Usl JLL'VI IIA J U JS>
IIA jLjátf JfLL'VI IJLA 3 31^S/l ^L^rl jj J-^LJl 31JsSíl y j» ^ÍW - 1
IJláJ a-LiJ oljlj-äJl ijJb- 3 '^^J ¡tJá^iil < _ / » ! - Li JUjVI
r^jL le. JjLuVI IIa Sjlu^ÍÍ ^Lgll -M*®
çyus y:. is^jij
<<jli;VI IIA -Lid OLL¿I ja Ljjj^ j¿>4 La s-LiJl (Í)
. ( _ £J V« <JLI;VI IIA JLITF A,.,¿¿¿J JI L> Ä^JÜFJ (S-1)
^ . y. 4j._Ml iJlil d f l ^ lj i - i ! y ji J^-IJJI U¿Jl f j^Jaí - o
r
¿Jl jj-^l ¿^ La s-L±u-L cJjliJVI IIA jU?I j ALJÜJ çjL La JJJI*J" £/> CÁJLÍJVI
. JUîVI IIA 3 31Sil ^L>ja>rl «i^J^Ltil 31JsS/l Jy tljVI jily UJ^J
^L-oJ^rl Jj J-aLJl 31jJhSlI j-1 JjS/l äjj-ül JL.le- Jl ÂjLaSfl jïJJ) ~ 1
^JJLJ JDU IA-LÍP Jjr ¿il (31 j-IsS1! JjSn ájjjJl 01 yíVL JSLSJVI IIA 3 31
4JLvsjj J-^Ltil 31 jJ^Vl yj-i- oiLJl CJIJJJJI JLÍ*;J .JUJVI IIA ¿LÜ J.JJ
^ jjJu f. La c3ljJbS¡\ j¿jl oljjjJl Olj^VL t3L«;VI IIa 3 31 ^J&S'I
(iliíVI IIA 3 31 JaSíl ^Lj^rl J_aL*i! 31
IIA 3 31 jJsVl J^Uil 31 y jl yLt-^1 olJJÍ JLÍ«: - V
J Li; VI IIa 3 31 JíSll ^L^ri J^Uil 31 ¿Jl oli jSfl 3 Jli;VI
y JbS¡\ /y
J_SJ V JL¿LÚ IJ_& 0Î 2J2Jy;. c3^Js ç^l j^SCa L-Uä» Lc:- «.LJ jí tÄjjj^
l?
.31 JFS/l Jl LJUÍJI IIA 2üLaSíl JL-JI £JJL" ja 0J^¿ 3 31 JÖ^I (¿Jí
-21-

--- Page 149 ---
WLJIJLJI (J^^-^JJ
t_Ji_dbx¿Sl ÖLPIy> CÄJJJ-W^jj Si* Li ¿JLJZJ dJüüu j
.Salili 2uJL*jl i_íjUii j (-ÌLaì^I Î - ( JJ Cj»-pjJlJ
JjL JUl^t IJl& (J <_iljJbVl jj J-*1^ y>* - Y
jj-äj ji L» liJÜi JL*j o l J 5" f Y • Y V ^LP 3 ÄJUJI AJ 2j^p
.dJJi JUj'VI Iäa (j i_il^Uj^t-1 J^UJi <_ilJs^i y y
3 ¿UITj cjurtfl li-ft äiviSl olì ^»iSÓ-tAJ Uíj íL¿>J j¿- ip l^-Pij lülí.1
L5
. V1 J ¿ ^ ll J,j^l ÛjLdl
S o Siili
j ¿LiJ^I IJOÜ ^»Lx^í I_.jjLJ 4_JT ¿Líj^I IÜL_Ä y. - ^
.aJ Jlt^l
0 j f.\jy>- IjJt ¿s «¿til «IA \ 6jilJl 3 LgJl jtjJ.1 ÁJ^I (_¿JÍxJ - Y
LVSL1- L>LXAI 4JLSBJÜI (J,jJj . 2_uljLp J>pj 3_Y»L¿l J^J 4ÍLLÍ djL^Jaj 4¿ÄAJJS oli
.di J^]¿J J i_Ì^2> JiCJ ÁJS jil OIJJLÍÜ
J_*UJ| ó iy y ujl^. ¿Jl o Wj ¿ji>Ji y -- V
,4Jjíj^ü f-^'j ciJ^' <3 CJUJ^I IJL» (3 (-¿IjJ^Sil JJ
Ï n Siili
4jL./>jj LI*JI J-&J ci—ilj-if^i y y — ^
.JUJ^I IIA
IyjLdo oí juryi li_A 3 c3l^S1! Â_Jlij"^l (3 (_>l^-¡fSü jjh^ - Y
iJLÄ 3 t_>i^JfSii ^Lo^i J^^i (-ilj^^i yy (^ijj-5 ¿r* «jy ÇÎ* JL^Î 3 Ù^Iy
-20-

--- Page 150 ---
3:» til a-L& 1 V ¿y^Jjül l-^tyr. J-U JS^ 2L»Jiáil c->L>ji*il - ^ ^
S^^Jb C!—i y=>lycL^o'yi . Y "i — i j»/ ^ j^JLJU Lá»j yc-«-*»^
J o U - L ^I JljJL¿ J 3-UL~il tliljJli <3 dJJ¿ Jl 4_?rlü¿l 31^isSíl V^Jl ODLLU
J Äjjj^J J )gJl (3 ®jJ" J-^" cdüi Jl SiL^Uj .CJIJJIÁJI Í-Lü
3^J» J-S' JuuU ( j jd SJLÍI y. áJJJLII Jj-^rl L«-¿ jJ 31^S/l
.Li j Lxbj ax»®LJ.
^JUIIL ÜL ,3 J JÁJL ^JIP «^JLÁJL A-LA YR. ¿¿JL Í-IJ>J¡-I ( J ¿ » L < S J ^I ~ \ Y
L¿2JI yC-^l ¿JU4J .LJsj 4X.&LJ. 4_Í-¿¿J ai_JjJj 4 JU-I >- 41-3jJaJl
JJLJAJL C ^ L * I 3 L « JV ¡ Y » !L RIP J OÍ 3C 5_ LP O ^ L^
¡UJ^IL SLPI^ TALLII 0JLJ& ^ \ V SJJ¿¿\ (3 L§JL JLJUIL YJL C^.SLJ.1J OLF.1 J-T^LJ
olj-UU Á-^l y s l , J , j _ ¡j .3:>lil «J-jfc Y ®jJL¿Jl _y. 3^JaJJ y*_ll
.31^S/l óljJJl ¿y oL J& 3jJ¿¿\J ¡Ld?jil
(3 H¿UÚ^\ I J_A ¿ 31^JSS1! ^L^Ä-I JJ 31JJSVL JL-OJÜY - ^ F
íl-JUjMI y. ÁJlÁJÜb Ái-yaJ-l oLjyil j-» 3 Jj ÍL^-^Ij 4 JjNI
— V - 4 Ä F Fy CÍ^I-r4J olflJ-Ä-Ij J-jl^ TÉIÜ.1 AÓ-A ^LSCs-L 3JJJL>J
.jt-pojlj oljll^pr^l Ájli-i ^JIp LS¿>
. Siili ÍJLA ÜLULJ JÂ-Î 2L«lül OlJdJl Jl J^C-oil ^»OÍJ - ^ 1
^JIP 4_jl^isSll 2_^L]| Ol-Ü-Ü ÄJli-JÜb ÂI-yalll OljJLSil ^LJ L¿JÍ JT-PJÜI ^JLSJ^ - ^ o
.Jvslyu
Ï £ Oidi
IJJJI JLSJ"YI I-LA 3 (31 ^JSSÍL ^ L ^L JJ J-^UJL 31 ^VL ¿UÜ-^ - \
I-LA JPJS- J^JPLJTI ^»JLAJL J^ÜIJ JUJ^I LÁA JL-JLJ
.("á-AUJI aL^a-j-l ^^btL^I a_JL^p" 3JU*j L^Jl jLJuil) J-^rS/l 2_LjkJl aJIJuíÍj (ÍLíj^I
-19-

--- Page 151 ---
3-ÂUxII olj.1j-^y^l £W>Ij J_A olj.1^r-rVI ÄJli-Ä jUol^ ^- O
C ¿ Ui (J Le. (l$-v> Y Siili 3 ÄJjUlVI <_>juk g .3 ^-Lll ji*-^
OuSuJl OU ^»rij í 1 Siili o^rjí. 31 Jä.^1 c^ilyÜ tJsj SiJcil oL*L~ll ¿Jj- jÀ
oU-U^-VIJ oLjJjVlJ SJlJtI oL^jLli J-A» U 'Y SilLl y. 31 Ui^S ¿jl
. ^ i Siili y. 3uil*jl áLvíJ-I ^^AäI^I 3 U i L i c o l j ü J lJ
^j-álxllJ I»-Lili J^p-JÜI OLiu jjl <L-lJl JV^-jJl ¡LiLLá JUS} ^ JpyJl - 1
SJljs^iII ¿l—Jsl jJc^i 4_äJjcll olflj-ä-VI <3L-w 3 ÄJUäJI oli 31 <_£il^J ¿-a
Jlil J^PJÜI ¿_P avals' SJJ_v3 2lj»Ij"I CÒLAVI jJlíJIÌI J I . j 1 j V j í i!j_l!
. ^ i Siili y. ÄlbJl 3 U iliC^JLÁII JU^VI
:ÁJLÍI olaji*ll fUáiíb 3 JT - V
oLL-Pj jiLvüll Lijll 2ut¿jJl oljLp OIJIJIJV ¿Jaj i^pr jjyíJ (í)
jSÑJ-l 4JL¿I (^jJ 2jjJíll SJWWLI oLjLll JLJCU-IJ JJ<J A^JljJl sja^ilJj Ig^Jljl
3 31 JJÍS/I AI-YF JJ J^LJl 31 y y ¿y Lfcle- jiljllj ^bll JOCÓ ajjjj!
Í<3Uj"VI IIA
Lujaj SiJ_¿l l^i/L^ ij-l^-j ^-¡^ 3 jj-^ ^JuLül oLajJjtllj (s-O
. i Siili ^ y.
^JuS^jLJ ^Lll JI-íu OIJJLÓ (j-jucj oLajJu«-a L¿2J! 3J-L? JjT ól — A
.¿L^VI ¿V Siili
OLLUl Jl (»JlJII j^JÜI ¿_p oLajbea 31 jis^l ólJÜJl fJI-L" -
C U J Ï » J ^ -iljJ.1 y. OIJJLÍJI S^LJJ L^TJJJ^SÓJI J_ÁJJ J-JJ-JI JL^ 3 31 jJsS/l
.oLjUl aJjfc jí J^P-ÜI ^»JLä; ¿Jl ( J 31 ^Sü Jx^iJ
3 -¿bdlJ f j*>LSl J^-Pjjl oLaj»JLÁJ ÙÎ 31 jJs^l 2_aLJl óIjlLU - \ .
L?
. ^ j \ , J <\ iljli y. ol jaiJl JLJ L^rjJ J¿J j JJ J^JI Jbí-
-18-

--- Page 152 ---
oLJyJl ùLóo jjJu> 3 JUi^l (Ji* J ^S/l ajL^jj i-il^»Vl ßy J^ij
• J>J*^ ^Jj-1 <3 j oljJJLit Í-Lj Äv^Ui-l ÄJjVI
> Y Siili
I_OJJLJJ|J T^LAJ^UL JIJIJLJI ¿Ü¿L (J I_>L^»S1! L)JLO"
'¿^-•LL JLt (3 oL»ji*il Jl JJ-^Jrl J4_»L*Jl 25"jLiilj 2^>l*Jl 2¿pyllj
.JUÎ^L IJLA JUF} 3 SIMILI TULJ.1 ^NL «-ÍA
s r Siili
JLÎJVI IJLA Y. LIUJ TJLJÀDL 2_JUI J_)J*JJ ¿^JILXIL OLOJU^LJ J.LJ - ^
oljJLï jLxp^I ¡J J^-L" 2_Jl¿ 2Jjy. jj ç^pjJlj olf.1 jy-4 ^JL-à jUs|
.¿LploJrl 4jJ^XJI ¡J,} j jls'yi
¿Jl oiljJs^l 2_^Ul ùlJdJÛ Siili «JlA JLu; j 2JJ^il ÂiLLiJl jU^ I^ - Y
yjl CîjLIIJ olf.1 j-fr^fiJ Jjl^JaJl (3 ^Ujjil «-Lì J^^Jdj .liljJJ çjL=> (3 L^Jl L¿
.«¿ill íJ-A ¿jA \ r s y¿Ji 3 i$Ji jLuii
tL&jjÄjj 2_JI_¿j^| L^Ip ¿Jl ÁJLLóJl o L "y J,l 2Jli_óJl jU^I .Xu—o - y
jj- J^JlP c2_^tJl ajjt-^2.il 2_jjjjrl JjjJlj Ij_C ùljJJl J-iS/ i - 3 L i y L*
C2_JJÍ3JJ| SÍL—JI ÇY4J (.(4UP JJ-C-J JÍ-PJ
C2L_JÍ>JJ| OLPMJI L^i Le. cÁ-Jláj'yi L^IP (j^aiJ ¿Jl 2_ili_JÜI c->LJJ - t
jjLiJij cûLjüjl j^-j-jiJlJ Jl í yj 2_jJJ¿I ^jjl¿JlJ ¿fjlL^Jl Öjlí jJjLáJJ
jJl ¿iLilJ o l f r lJ ( j í t jj LgJl Jl^uJkl 4j^^xil If.J>r ùUjjJl JJL>cJlJ
.«¿Iii SJla ^ ^ «3 ¡y
-17-

--- Page 153 ---
) S 8¿lll
OIJJJI olJJIJ oUlJUJ^I IJU y. OIJJLÓJI ¿L. jyu OÎ - \
orj; yLdJ aJjUJl JjjJlj !j_c ÙIJJJI JJÎ J_jJ cijjJ JiS/l OI~LLJI U-j-w- y Í¡ il^Sil
Olj.1J_?rl ¿L¿l J^rî J-« lO^I « ^ J j ^ -I JjlI J^ ' ¿^ Jï*-^ (J^l^-
^-¿-IJJ 41_JL_Í¿>III]I J I^JL—^SSJL olf.1 J_?RL J—¡ULTF T J J — ' (J CJ»« ¿UJ IL I-LJL
j»_Jl*J| ( —ilJ^rJ <J¿J-^l Ji (J J-v3J^lj 'L®J^j ^ J J^J-^Jl j J DI
d—¡j?- 4¿l¿_¿ fljj ./?; jJuiil jCJ—SjJ tÂl ./?ll Oli 4_/«l*Sl 4--PjJlj » «JjJuJlj
jJl
C^L^Ll^^l Ji IJWLX-A^oj CA-prjlJi oljwLiJl çljj jJSVJ ¿M ~~ Y
JL
c3ljJs^l 2_y.Ul OIJlJLLS i3ljJaS^ (Jj j^S^Jl ùîj cLA LJlij
^JJJJLJ OIJJLASI Î-LLJ IL)L J (¿^JIL JJ-^J (¿^J-^ C I ( J - » —' L C.
JL_L?J (3 OIJJL_Â1I JLJJ 4,1? JUIL ^JJJJL DJUI <3 L-J:.
O LP liai 3-UJ 2L»L¿ J 4S" JUUIL ^JP OJL AJUÉ 2_J^P Ó JIC ÙL ^J^.J
Jl^" ^^Ip 31jJäJ^I ùlJdJl äjOi 31JsSil ù OÎ ^¿-¿i - V
<3 OIJJL^I JLO O I ^ I L ^ Pi 31^JSSLL 4_^JiÄxil OIJJÜI ùî j li-f
.<31 >S/I VLJ! ùULJl
IJLJÜ JUULJ ^^IP 1_>IjJbS¿\ ÓIJLIJI «JJLÍ ¿Jl 31 JJPS1! ¿JLJ - 1
ÍÜLJÍS ôJJ-V2J jJsVl ÔiJ^J» y Uj dJi t3 ^ ÍÍJI^^Í!
ôjjwaj 31 J-lsSíl 4_¡»lj! ÙIJJJI *_LJ ùî .oljwLiil 4_AI*iil JJJIJLJI JÎ OIÎ.1
l-UiU OIJJL-SJI jl o l ç l jl o L L» jl J-ÀJ 3 J^r^! ¿jP 2
.JLL-^I IJlA
IJLA JL-JJLJ ji-pjj iwvvw-J^ oLjJ(Jj^is yS- oljj-^il Í.L) 4ji2_àjî JJ*J — o
.(JLiJ^I IJ3 a-JU^I jî. SJL^cJ.1 i^LlI 4^-^jil oLJ^Jl J-^A; Le. cJUî^l
-16-

--- Page 154 ---
> » 3¿ai
Lä- ySÚJl 3jla DLio J^-S/l 3l äj j j (31 ^LiS - ^
J j. j-joj
,3jl¿jJI oljlp oÜU-jl j ji*^ J-^ [J^ «jOâJI ¿^-w-TIXS l»U LS-JÄ^- L^JLÖJj
J U jI y£dl ÁySí LTl yl <.31 jJs^l - Y
TLG^OJU J I—OR J] J^IUI AJ JLAL I L^-4 TIL TÍILÁJ'YI IIA JLI^ (3 TJU^XJL J
. 1 g 1 ¿jj LÄ-^Jj^SsJl J,W"| JjJjdl jbcül J-aJiil
. JUîVI IIA ÄJUIVI v^ry. SÜuAl U - J a JT - r
31«Là obLàj| J-Â-Î LorjiySóli jLL>l JLáJ^I I1_A ^ Y. Làjj - i
VGL G> J LÄ- JJYSCXIL JIJ JJLXSIL _}J*LL JY^'J JIJ"-^' ¡J V^J L-J LÄ-JJJ^LIIL 3.JT
\ ÓJJL¿}\ J LGJL JLÀLL J^RS/l 3_ILJjiaJl Ji L*-— C JLSJVI IJ-» -LY^" FP^-i
.«¿III «1A
JLTIIL Ç^JI-VAJL (3 "LCU- A^BLJ AmzJIJJ JLSOMI — 0
CJL^JT! I-LA J^PJLJJ .2L«IJC^1I J ^IL^JS^L J_>JJI J ^-LDL JY^SJ J-^-S/L J-¿JWJ
3_Jlll 3-JVI (—LR 3_JL JJL^JJJ LÄ- J I 3 _ JT LG TULPR J-«
31 J-LA^L 3_¡^Lil OIJUJI JJ-VJ JI-^HJ TJIJIAJIJ L-ÄJJ 3Jjl*xil J-V^ L_I CÄ^LÄJ^AJ
jJyS^Jt SjjjJJ JjS/l J^-ijil (3 ^ tL^rjiy^Jl Ji
Juyk; J-Â-Î ¿y í Jill j^jJl dlSi (3 U c3lJ^Sil DLüJl Jl j^pjJl ^läj1 - n
(3 LG-JL5JJ LIÄ-JJYSCXJL JJJ JJL*I11 J,JLDL J-ÍJ*^ <3 ^ '«^LLL «1_A
3_JLP JL^-IJ J . C-j 0 jl yil JS-IÄ^- 3 J-4 43^- ji Y^iJl Sj jjJl J^ -l y
ij-giRL OLIO 2l3-L1I oL«JI*ll jLXP^I j3 \ t Siili <3 LGJL JLILL 3_ll*Jl äJL^J-I ^^L^^l
.IgläJJ LÄ-JJySúil JJjkr JU J 31 ^S/l 3^Lil oloLil Jl ^JLÁII Y^oib ÄL^II
- 15-

--- Page 155 ---
(„JI—JXJL OJL j—> J-t^- Jl JL* I jl j—» 3 — 3 J _ _I OÎ ¡^f-*-^ — Í
ÙL-LLJL OL*-L>-LJ OLJJJIJ JJL 4_¡^JALLL O L * E - J LSLP I J-«
IJ_¿ ^ 3 L JJ ¿LI! JJCJ SJL¿JI J L VL (J^L^ YLDJ SJUUJL DJJJ L^ V C3L
J} 4_>rU-l 9jyt-vsJl 4_)jJJM JJ-Llj 1 j_¿ OIjLJI JJI J-ji ¿r4 jJ-flJl 3 ä
.i^JlSÌiJl J?rl (J^-a J^-""1 (3 a^aJ-fi-^ ijlJ-*J 2_alp ijlJ^a
JJJJCTF jj J 4JÍLÍJI OLA JL*_a ¿fCL^i Jf 31 OIJJJI FJIÄJ" - 0
O B T ^ LU LA T^JJI 3 L. C^L^IVL isilll SJLA JA V J ^ ÚVyüJlj
31 ^iaSíl .31 ^S/l Ä_-aL)L ùlJdJl Jl I^JTJL.Sj ^JJL ¿Jl 2_*¿yil a_*UJ| 2_Jlil Ji jil
p Jís e/'Lv-f ^Js- J5" ola ji*ll Í fjJü ^Js- i jl jll ¿Jl ¡j j^-Sl I
>L?
JLJXPVI 3 \ 1 siili 3 L$JL JL¿J.I 3L_1UJ| 3_JLP JL>-L" - 1
ij^JRL JLIO JLIJ'VI OLla jÎ/j 31 ^JBS/L ¡LaJÜxll OLJÜÜI L^AJI; ¿JL 2JLAJL oli ola
.^•Ldl JJJ^jl Äl^axll
OLio 2 2 Ì L U, oLajJjca JT3I>^I Í.JLÜI OLdJl^ -V
olí.1 J^r^j >U UiJ <Lal_p O ^ JJ Jj^t L*ll J 31 ji»^! SL^ÜI ¿)UUl Jl
|JL_Ä 3 31 jJsSn ¿L>JC>RL aJl^SJJ J-^l*Jl 31 jJjSn Y J -4 UJU^-O. ¿Jl yJl CIIL-llJ
31 jJsS/l J . \ F Siili ¿_a ^ V SJ-ÄiJl 4_1P ^YULJ" La JJJ í JjS/l ^"JJ-2 <3 "3Lij'Vl
.dUi J - I ^ T Í ^ S F»
4_JLLL AJ^I ^¡LX. ULILT DUI 3 U C2LJUÍ!>Ü AJLIL SJVI 0J-^J - A
. JUJ'VI lü
ajlll 2l_J5VJ oLLSCJl L$J U 4tilij"VI 11» ¿Jl û L . j ll 3jí - ^
2,U 4_Áílj» o l í - l 3 _ J l ll ijlJ_il 1P JJ-VÍJ-I 2_Jl»i 0L—> Jl cÁ_ili;!>U
SJII-^JL JJJJLJ IJ-C ÙIJJLJI JSÎ L^WW- V C 3 L Ó I J J L JI ILJUCU-L J^PÍ
.^jJajjl 4_^L1| j láL^tJljl^l t3L-" 3 t^lJl
-14-

--- Page 156 ---
olç.1 j-Ä-'yij ft j-tyü J-^ ¿y j ^ ¿ f ^ -- 'LliJJ j ~ i
rM O ^ UI ^JJIJ
ìjlJuVl fte (Î)
itijljkU iLux^lj (O)
ÍOjjJ-l 2jÜÍJI y>ljjiilJ
'LgJ ÄÄÄ-J M J ¡uib jl ysí j JJL> ^^Ip j}?;T Ji ¿Jl Oil jJ-l j (J)
y J* Ujblj >Udl ^JLj (_*)
LÍ_Ji Jl-^j CÂ_Ç>-Ull jiíLjxll JÄ—JA^TJ í^¿jL^LI J S¿5 ¿iy»LxJl Ot>Lg J (j)
Í JYTSJL J JU
ÍÁjiUalí^l jiP _/LJ-lj (j)
. Ä - Ä - J J j S ^ J ^I JJèjJIJ (ji-jJl j ÄJ-^I oIJU^I ájJ¿j Q*-)
TJLÁJ^L FRLJOM 2 J 0 L Ü 1I 4_JJJJL J-^JLJ 2-JT JJLCJ — O
. J Lift I £jL>- ÄJUaJl oli «.I jjji-l o L aj oLjà.:ll ^ di-SiS"j
* dilli
J 4.31 ^Vl OlJdJl SjlpLJ. aJL i_iljJsS/l 4^.JLáxll ùljJûl ¿»Jiá; - ^
.¡Lïliftl y. Ä^iLäJl ULIjsJ^ Ä J U < s IJ <_Lyb^Jl JS"
.LPJI? ^JJL IJLA ^JLSJ 2-U¿JIJ» JÎ |CJLÄJ ^^JLP (JY-SIL «—ILJBVL - Y
IIOD L B LJ I_>LJJSVL OIJUJI J^¿>LJJ" ÛÎ CÂ-LL ÍJ_PR JL_L?L J - F
^»LLI JjjJl (J,l ®jLi^l J-^J J-5^J J¿U<all Âjtw-IJ ÁÍJÜS ^^ Jij-^
4_¡ JalJl oLÄ^JI y—NI (»-Pi colf.1 J^ftl ¿r» 2_¿L¡£ 2_p J*>L¿ c2_^UJl Jl y* Sii
ÂJiodl áXA JiíLóJ DÎ j .LÄL J Jj î-31 jJsS/l 2_>»UJl ùlJLÛI oU-Lx^I ôIP yI j ìa^
.ILL- 2jJJUIL IJ-GJRL LWLSJ ^Y-UIL JJJ^DJ
-13-

--- Page 157 ---
V oljJùò\ JLid j J w f l J ji 31 jJ^I OlJdJl Jl - \ r
. u j \ ' j ^ iijii fis^Si ujj íSiiii »i* ja \ \ j \ . j ^ j
IjyJ\ AL^- Jl ^ Í SIILI (3 L^Jl jLJuil ALIDI ys^ki^] ÄJUP ^aj - \ í
<31JsS¡\ s^bJl ÜIJLUI UJLJ ¿Jl Ijl j\ (Î)
(3 4_J| jUult <jl*lil SIPIJA Ç-A i_JiJxijl olí-l j>?\ XJúj ¿jy^-J (t—j)
'Siili
ala ja \ » äyüJl
JÂ-Î ^ ^JLSÍI J i_juÍNl)l ÄjUiJ Xaç."%> JfiI
4_J| jLiil (JL-JSÓ)! JL£ 3 ^bJl 3jJ>l 3 J»t*Jl ^Jlálil js\yC^IJ (i)
.Siili aJjfc ^^o ^ Sj
A óidl
jJcJ SjUJl jLj^b Ua-Jjil J yU-J-l JL/»t 31 3^Jüj - ï
CÒJJÜ-L 2JU)AJL Y>LJJÀJLJ J-^ALIL 4_¡JJ^I YKLJ_L¿J| J ^ CS-WAJLJ IFLLISJJ ^LLL
.jl Sil J yLj-l Jfl^- jj-l (3 jji J
¿Ldl
ÁJT
L&JJJ*J j 4 JJJ Jjllij^l lift J^IAJI 31 ^Sn y j» 4kLJ
.JUj-^I lia <3 31 ^S/l ájiv'^j 31 Jb^I jij» a li Laij LaJulsjJj
j 4_JT JjI— y. j olí.1 I j ^ g¿ll ¿)í 31 ^^íuj - f
4 I?."^IL JL^^^Lj YL^J-LJ (JJJCJ iJjy^Jj (Jjl_*J (j^L'-'L tf-U^Í^L C4JJJJ|
.^Lil jJcò SjUaJl jU^U
-12-

--- Page 158 ---
31 J-L^S/L I ¡ T - PI i Js- AJJXJLL ^SU 4-^SJTLL O^LFTOLOJALL ^^ÓJ - A
o a L a s j U^L 3 SJl>-T cibili al_ft V aJ LgJl jldll ols.1JujLxS
.Siili elA
1—jjLJj <_i_5ÓJl Jsuja-é CjLLp (3 ti.l—^i'Vl tJjJj J-T ¿jl—jo -
¿aJLviil oli oL*LJ.I jÌ/j oL^L^Jl ji/j k jajLi jjj*; jl j dUi ¡3 Le. tol«.!
I^Jj i_< J-o-Ùo Ji ¿Jl
iUuSÓJl Ju 3 ij^irl jl/j oUfralil ji/j o L l X u LJ (1)
jJl (_juS\Jl !?)•?•>- J-ukjJ SpL^s S^aPj (<-r-')
S_)jJjl oli oli-lj-^rl J 4_J yLJl 43JISJ ^Li l jJU JUT JI-IS^-'J (¡T )
ijJtdJ 2ljl_aJl JL*.^(JJÌSIJ ¿SV^Ij oLiJS alpi^ cL^j
t ^Jp ^Jj^l jJàDlj
AJILYAXI^l A-JPULIR'YI jtJalJl ajj-i ì-Ll;j (-A)
.SuitjJaJl ^jlj^JJ ÌAIjcl^II «jL'yij cgiU^iVI ^yJl J-o-àJ JJL-JJ
tLjji 4-jJl(Jj-jSÓJI jj-p IP*>Ij ^»J-Ìj ùt c*Uaa>Vi iw—^ c<_3Jf J^J ~~ ^ *
CAJIÌ.1 j^-lj A UU<.j j^pjJlj ly^iJl JLì 3 AJU-L^-Ij 4-jU^Jjl ^MJl ll_a J^—io òÌ
.31 JsSil VLJl ùlJiLJl ^ ^ JL^I S-1-.p c^Ì 3 ^^Jl 0JÌ
Ò L ^ JJ AILLL AJ-A J.» ^ « ÉJ-AIJ! J 4_JL JLILL TJUS^JL J-UXLL ^JLSJ - ^ \
J^-ào Le. ti.L^i'VI CL4 L jl <_£j-^Ì Jillj jl OLP*>1; J.» cIJJJÌ
4 i ailll Y é lS ^ì JL^ L> J-ij L^J aiO.^- « jl/j iJa—Sj
.UKJ IP->B JT/J
cailll a-Ljs ^ . aj-JLAJL 3 4_Jl jLdll ì^JuSs.JLj J_i)dl ^MJl J^—ì ~ \ Y
.SjL»^! aJ-gjcJ j»lp (J^"-^ <3
-11-

--- Page 159 ---
_p!j A-jSryJl iSJhi LznÁ Ol Ó^d! olj.1 OU ( — î l- O
ls j
obuálJ oLúJl (_ylj¿J cÄ-LalSsJl Äjlä-dJL) J ÄS"jUuil ^^Ip J 4jL^M UUalJl
2^-Ldl ;yJ*Jl J_¿ií Jl OÍ c/LXIJ aJjUJl jJ/o^l ^jkiJlj
4—JÁ^L 2_¿ YD.1 , II J ÄJ_VÄ>S/I <—J jl—4_>YIIJL CJ JL_*il JI S-L^AXIMI JL_LPJ
ApL^Ó^I - A-jpL^r^i ol¡J J oLv-L~Jl (J L_4 - L iy OÎJ
2_¡XBJ LI J-I*lil Jy Jl 0jLdlJ KJA-^s.Jl 3 J ^ - PI ^JsS/l -
JLÎVIJ Y L¿ JJ _/LDJ A_LUI! ¿LL" L -^ N T<JM^JSSIL 2_~*lJl OUJUl O U B »L SLP!Y>
• ^bll júcó ájL¿Jl
YJ- ^JIP CTJLXJI J -M J-*1"* ¿R-4 ^J^" ^ OÎ - V
U J-«-¿o L. iLLxJJ ój^JlS" jUs} j^lji
CJLX^ío Le. câilii^J.1 jj«jj^-ilj <_JJL**JI j âJ-Jrl oL-jLil j oL»J-ÎL (!)
olj.1 _/>ri (3 Jydlj oL.L*Jij p-l*Jli 2JLadi jJr\ cs-Lá^^I
C JILÁFTL LJUO ¿JL 2_JUFTL O T Y J L^J Vs. CÂ^-w^JIL OLJ^JL (S-")
it_ïl^IbSJ Âjjiâiîl obLij^1!j (,-pjJl (CJlSjj iÂJLaJl ob i_3jbilj oUji*Il i_àJy p-P-J
2 G 11 2_J>I ^ILJ O L E. T^LDL) 2 ÂJJTXLL 2_V<JJJL <_¿JL*LL J_¡J*JJ (£_)
íjlyJl ¿U¿l Â^Lil ob.jJ-1 j 4J JLiyJ jÀ Jl p t^SLil jUj^I (JàJj ¿^Lil j»lJ¿JJ
;2 Sl*iJl ^L-iCJl ol—^jbr Jl_JJL¿ J eil^JsS/l OU—Ul SAPL-^.J ( i)
ij-prj olf.1 ¿r4 ls-^J ^J jJjS/Ij o U L > lJ
ÎÔJLJTI OLUJLJ.1 ^^RT-JJJ (3-^J ^JÄJ OÍyJlJ OIJJÄJI kiUJS'j
.LY»YPJ OLI-1 ^PRL 2JUI ¿^Í1 J (JÜ)
-10-

--- Page 160 ---
LprjjyxJl J-^J J^j^Jlj cJuSÓJlj (jLybJl jy>\ (J J^JUJ lC. tJUij yi
¡(^L U JL £¿1)1 AJLA 3AÌJ .F-UKLI^L O»- COLJAIIL
iLd?J SiJiiM oL®L~ll -LJL; 3 e/5^J f^ ¿r^pUa-ai! 4S"JLW> (y)
.2j_yajl oli Aj^^jll oLJyilj oly*Vl oiiii- ¿ru ¿^uil! y o-l7 1j
S-J^JD! i-ljl 4Jj^Jl jjP J^i (JIÌjVI 1ÀA jjC. ~
. ailll aJu» ^y» A «jiiJl J5 tg-Jl jLii.1 2_i^»Jl JJJ*J
V Sili!
(3 JJujdlj ouS^jL; jJucdi (^LJl (ILIRYI 1 y. 31 ^yJ - \
4_Ju c^Lll jJOJ yLJl 3JL15 y» jJ-lj ^Js* ajOUl jJayj ouxJl «jOiJl jjyJ
. T Siili J jLtll fljl
JUUI «LJ ^-PRLJJ LAIP LJL^ JSCJUJ ÙL 31 JJSSIL - Y
J^T-S/I 2JLjUl 4-AUJl AjU^^^I 3 ^^l—i 4_>Ìj c4_Jjij A-^^-iSlj 4^JJ ^LJJ ùjij
* >
(3 I tA-j^r JJJ^SJVI jt-is-JlJ 2_>L3- ¡Lw^jj jjÀli
JLI^B ^ L* ^ R^ Jisii UJUJI 31 J^HI V^l OIJLLU A^yJlJ s£Jil o U L ^i UjL^l
.^bll jjcS SJLÀJI
¿Jl Jj\>1J UIJ 31 J ^HI ÙÌJLÌJI UJLJ ¿Jl 3-IÓJL 3 YJ - r
. Jj^l 3 JliJ^I ÌwLA J 31 ^Sll ^L^rl 4JL/Jjj 31 J^Sn yy
^jJj ùLà ^ oLj Ji iL^U LJU- ÌÌLla ÓL 31 j-kSn j-aJ - t
oU-Li»! Joly ùlj t^JL^I ij-p1- J>i (j^J-aj ùi i-Jujb^^ ¿r1 ^^
-9-

--- Page 161 ---
J 2JLÎJJ1 OLJLP OTFUJL 3 ÄJT JLIÎVI IIA Y. LU - T
Il—A (3 31 jJfS/l J-aLxJl 31 ^isSll y y y j i
31 jJaSil y y« ^iA l-f^P 3 C ^ j - ls ^Lvî (^ip 31 ^S1! tJlajVI
:_ L U> J,i 3jJj tJlij'VI II» 3 31 J^Síl ^L^r l ¿Jwy
( S
3 JL_Js y j oljl_P olIlnJl (.Ji—jjbkJl (I)
ÎAjIÏ C-ijil
I _JLr L¿ ^„ysUUj 2_al*jl C-jI—SL^JI ÂfTjLJU» j-^JÏj j—Jié-J ( v)
iÂJiijJl oljlp OIJU-JI J» ijui^dl 3 31 JfSil
j^a JluÌL^W- ^Ul 3jIlSS oL'UjI oly_^a y2_¿>- 3 S^L-J-lj
d^L^jr. Í.UjÜ y>Ä 3jJ? l^aJbiti^j ¿)l ¿r^» OIÏI*JM! oL^yi^ ^cIJ ÄjäL-iJl
íLJsj Ó¿JL¿I
.4J.UJI OÜUJMS ^»IP <_Í4¿I¿ j (I)
1 S3 L$Jl jLáll 2JVI ¿jS- OL'UJVI OUlí¿ ^ S ^J V - o
^T 3J-W l^AJUS^I La Iii LjaJ SÍJLJ¿I AL^L^a iJu^iLl 3Js]I JJÂ^ 3 3^ill OIA
.Lisj áiJbM ¿jJLí^ OLJ} 3
JLij'VI II-A 3 31^15^1 y 3l^_ií>S/l yj—4 J—«^ó - 1
3 LGJL JLILL AJVI JLISL 3 U ^LJA-^LL ÁJA-JJSÍL ¿^ <LJLIL JLÍIj*JI ¿Y L ^I ÇD^UJ ÙÎ
/UJ Ujliil 31 jiSíl M-Jl úlJÜÜI SapLJ.j ÄjjbVI oUiJl Siili «IA ^ i jyiJl
jJl JLP ¿lll «JLAJI JIJVI JJ
y (3LL'VI IIA j 31 j-US/l JJ J-^l 31 ^S/l yj-a JL^XJ - V
31 jJaSll 2jjlyaj yP1 j ÄlalSo> ÁJ^ jJ- j 2-^IJI 31 y; - A
^jIP tJ_1¿S| („s^ "¿¿ilJ JU. 3 tLJf J SiJL^I l¿L®L~a -UÁiJ
,'s U-u-LJ.
-8-

--- Page 162 ---
0 dilli
J_JJ*JJ Oj-ys J,! tí-L^á^l J ob! y>r[ 1-31 ^J?^! 01 - \
a.iláJ'yi t äibli (i) ^ Sj-äii! (J 4_Jl jLÍJ b> JÍ J 4_SJJJÍ oljbé- oblj^j jj
.oblili b.j
¿UjUjl olPyjJ.1 J^b^jJ jJ Olç.1 J>rI ÍU¿I 1P 31 - Y
lS
aLvJí olí oljj-ïilj ol¿Lij^l (3 (j^jvill jt-jlíSt jlif'VI j J^ÁÍ? J,l c^bJl ^^íp
olj_¿¿lj ^b^b-Jl :0Lij a-JUí^l t^ry. Jlij^l ¿Jl
Ujblj oblili k ¿>- JJÍJ 4UJJAOJJ oblili 2jljl 2_¿^bJl ob'lxJ^I Je-Oé-. 3_áLcdl
CÁ-BJUJL Ä^B^BWJL J ÍÁ^UI OIJÜJI (3 OBLILI ÄJJJ^^JL OBJJ^Ü.1 Ä^LO^WJ.1
JujS'b íilpl COLjlili ájbt>U ÄS" ^-juil l_¿_>SsJl J J-Jí
.Î-UAIS^T O- C ^L «JL£ ¡UAJJIL 2JJJ^FCIL JJP £¿BIL YJU¿-
n Siili
J—yíjj J ^j-l» 0jb>¿ Jl ^ 31 ^JsS/l jbü¿ ùL 31 jJaSíl j»JL~J - ^
cJuib^Lj 4_ÁJuoil biblJÄ-I 3 ipí a^-b'V bJsJ l¿U®b^>
L?
^jJlp j 2_JjbJ <3 ^ ^ b ^í 25"jbiil wUp c3!jJsS/I - Y
J_¿£jj S^lJcLvJ.1 iL^úsj lib^L^j:. Í.UjJl ¿3 Ují 2jcJuiíí- ^ubj ^IJÄI^I
aJbiSO J-Jaíj tj^isJ-l j^jÍp dl-b (3 be. tÄJLUÜ!j 4_j¿Jl
J_»bJ! 31 ^JsSíl YJ-» T3 SJL_»JÓJ.Í olibi,J^l LJili j^jll
.(J-OJB JIAJ^I L-U (3 31 JBVL JJ
bJsj Íij3l ob®bJ.l t3 bJji 2jjidl cji^ib^l ^ibü Oj^ó - r
.SS'jLill 31 J&H 1 ba^ y j bp ji» lililí 1ÁA y:.
-7-

--- Page 163 ---
c^jij-ll <_jL~J-I j cJL-J^Ij ÄJjUi! j JUjá'MIj ÂÎJJIj ¡LiLLiJlj ^^iJl
.JUjVI IÒa <3 öljJsS/1 ^L^rl <uL/3jj J-«l*Jl 31 J^S1! J-y ¿y SJloJj«!! obli-j*>U Uij
JLyjj jly 1 J_LP c^y-ly 01 tLJsj 5¿Jl¿I lil^Lv^ <3L^ 3 y-ri - ^ t
ts-L^aá^l g -lljl OL LPJ LJUill Äjj-JuJl OLÎI*JN|1J ó-yb^Jl olç.1
.Siili sJ-A y \ V SjlÀÌ\ f .3 ¡Lililí L^ry ¡UJtíJl ob L iJ LJL-Vl
libUaxil jjSj ¿Jl 31 jJsSíl J P I J U j ^I IJuü <3 31 jJs^l ^yly - "i 0
.31 J^Síi v>Ui oijlüi ^ jyiju" oíjj'U y yTSíi
LAyj ^sii^l gpL^/l J-«l£jl Le. - J ^J - \ i
cSiLll «J_A y Y SjlÀJl i y. 3j-yiJl yiáj (JLájl cJ-v^1 y ¿Jl ts-LyaP^I
3 U tJUïVI ¿Ui ÁJUS/1
n
31 ^Jfí UJJJH .LJ5J SÍJOM LIL^L^. ¿Y LJPMJ! JLÍP CALV^JI ob
.(JUJVI ¿üi ^iSU-U Lfcip jilj ÄJliJ^l
J ÍWU¿1 4_j"ÜUJl y — J L Á J ^I dLJi 3 3jJs J_S" - \ Y
SiLll
«J_A YJT \ Í J \ Y ÚYJ-ÁÁ.U LÁÍJ SIILI ^ SJJL¡¿\ ¿ JLJJ.1 J JURYI
• 'i 0 j "i V ùy^L-Uj
Y* ^^--LS^L ^IUAÁVL JLUL 3 31 o i I ii - ^ A
J^LSÓJL 3 J-^ÍP ÍJJI J-F ÒLI J—J^LS^JLJJ T<3LIJ"^L 1J_A 3 3J-IS LG——IJ
(JÍL^ÍNI J-»LSCJL J LAÍye. ÁJJY^. Jy>J DLL" LR«JIVYI
ÔJU¡s ^ H 5 y. ^lAl JláJ^I J AJP ^j^udl Uül*Jl ^ y- ^^oJi^l
. \ o j \ V ¿^jíLIJj Siili aÓA j» \ i j ) V óvV¿U láíj Siili
oL'UjI 4_JLéi c^Lsnyly^l ^-v^j J,l 31 jJa^/l 01 y^j - ^ ^
L I L J YJ Y Siü.1 IAJLXPI 3 J 'If-^ J J-^-VL ÄJJJKJ ÁÍJJJL oljlp
,ÄiL>J.I ÁjJsjJl 3j^^Jl y? (3 J^" oIJAÏJ Á^lo oils' j^j ÄS'yill
-6-

--- Page 164 ---
^ ilj_JJ Laij caibll aJU IjÀJ J*-í ja Jì\J^l ùULil Jl ¡*-pJl f - o
^ jJL ^ ^^ J M 0 U J ÜI J| (vPjJl ùL LJL-j tU j Ì' j
.ULIJ>r\ 3 £jJJl JA Js-1
oLsfcJly—! ùî Â-^Ul âjot-sJl ^¡jJ^-l Jj-Jlj lj_c ùlJÛJl JJS1 ¿r^U - ^
(^J-PI^J L_C. âJJ jîj 4_jLijj| oljLp oUbJl ! ol«.jl->rlj bJJa^-j
oJ^JJ olf.1 J^» t-il^S/l aJLs^J Up 2j4LÍ1 ä^'yill ¿ibi ¿^U. - V
.Siili ala y. i_ÍLw¿>ti]l ¿jLJ 3 01 ^¿Laii^l ydJ ^ b» jî/j
oL ji*il TLJS J SÍJ_J¿I LG JLO*L~» JL-ÌP e I il ^r-U^I f- A
yrj-1 2j_s¿3 oli cjÌJJJLa Y ^ -I ç/ \ Läij ^ galij ÄJbLJuJlj ^ jU 2
.ijliftl IIA 3 ól>S/I AÌ^JH J^UJl <_il>Sil
* J
I äiJ O L^ L_JSJ SIJ <Jij—l3 J—S" JLJ -
(3 cJljisS/l ^b^rl Al^Sjj J^bJl I_il^S/l _/ji 2iv5 oli olj^« Y {I \ J^r^J
. ^ t Siili <3 l$Jl jbiil äJUJI äLsäJ-I ^M^O^I âJ^P ^cìbi ¿Ui 3 bply tjjliftl Ila
j-W^I 3 JLLftl ULA 3 J M ^ L ^ Ä -I J^bJl JM^Síl - ^ «
.(J,AJjjì 3 B^5j SÍJL¿I OL®L~JJ ÂS^yiJwl Â-KJJI
¿iJ i-JJLJÍ Lvdfj SiJU¿l ¿UJUJl ciJ 3 OÍ i—ijJaJ jj^: - \ ^
^Lkia-I aJl^sjj J-«b«Jl <__iljJsSíl ¿y SJ_oJj«il oliLij^U Lüj ti j.«\i\\ ¡s
.(JbLftl IJla 3 <_il^is^l
j»Lp JÄ— 3 l-s—ÍP ¿JLJ ¿Jl j SÍJ sM ol^l—dl J^—J - Y
.SJLftl aJ^jcí
; I « l_jl 3 J -b-J^J SÍJL^I l Jíjjpy - ) r
4^!>LJL i_ILJ-I?SIL jj-Äj" íU SJLJL OLLPJ LIJ.1 Ä JOU UJI jj> LJSJ SÍJL¿I LIL^L^C.
-5-

--- Page 165 ---
r «¿ai
^ . j ^ j V j ti Ij-llJ SiJuM J^kll i ^irL) çYfr ./}- jî 31
jjaS ^LJl ixJl <3 l^-v^J Ldaj LAjLPL cI^P ¿ÍJ jîj ^ V j ^ j
IJ-PR J . Y «IL-LL (3 (_/»J-A^L (JUj'VI I-La J o J _ ? RÎ LLL
a_w.Ul úIJJÜI JI 4_>-U-l ^5-ply jí
ls
_1P í¿r«>Sl ^S-Lp LJLÍ; 31 ^JsSll
.ÓLL'VI Iii JUiJl -Lidi 3 31
i Siili
3 J3 TY «¿Iii 3 :>~L¿I J^t-S/I JJJWI SjljJA a^RJI 3JLJ¡> - \
# t
Ä^LJI ij i—J^Jl 3 4-~¿jJI oljLp oIJUJI ^IíjjV ^^ j ¡jri^ Jl 31
Jij í3ljJsVl OIjJJI jj> J>í oÜl*JVI ^Liïjl ùt
¿fcj ¿)jlj-J (J-^Áí- J-5^ (j^* C<L>-Lil ¡LxJjtSl 3jL*ll J Laíj villi Jmj ol./i.à-ïxJJ
3LJI ¡I 3 jJl ^ --Ij: I g "lljl oLL>-Pj jil y?ll Lid.1 Ájj-JuJl oLjUjVI
.yLÜI JIp í-Lüil Jl <L*IjJl ¿j^JrlJ 2Lo_dl ¿jLw- 3J 3UajVI ^J-L-I ^^JLp túyíil
.LA-L^JCJJ L^JLJL^ Ld^j «¿JL^- 2_JLI* ¿jlrfj i—®j-^5 J-^" " V
.ol=*Ldl ¿11" 3IJL»Í JJÌÀ 3JUS ÍJJÍ JLJÙÌ- JJIJU il¿l Jl 31
I « u ^ L^ jjlÄi; UJLSj 3^-L» JJNJ Ldfj S¿JL¿I 2_JLSI 2^*Ld.l Ji^u- - V
C—JLS" ólj Á S ' 4JU t ^ J- ^ CJ Lds>J 5JJL¿I
ÄdajJl 3jjJáJl Í -3 '^JIj-ÍJ
íL^xpI j j J ¡\ Lajjí S.LÍ 31 ^isS/l OI-ÜJl J-^ljí ¿)í J^ri ~ í
jî 31 ^JaS/l 4_-»ldl DIJJLÜ .¿UaáVI J U¿ OL'UJVI ^ ¿I- 2-JÍIK* 3IJL»Í
JJj-^ lSJ->»dl ^rr-JijJ 2_ál)dl J—vfly
.ÜLÄII ÄDAjJl 3J^)¿3l ^YA (3 tiUaáVI LÍ> LAJUJL¿ jí OÜUJVI YÍI^ 31-uí
LS
-4-

--- Page 166 ---
> Sili!
ÄIL^^LJ .JLJUFTL ^ SILIL J SJJ!JJ! UUJL_>OJI J-J^S AJLÀJ^I 1JL-A ^JH
J!
¿J! t^Ld! jyJ OLio äjjUS^I «JL>^Ì! ! AJIÌJI "ÄJU;^!" -x^úu (Í)
(3 OJU.ÌP-1
íáJIí;^! J < _ 3 l jiy "<_>lJ^S/I x^úu ( O)
.cjliJ^! lJu& (3 <_jJaJ! "t-3JaJl" ^Ikvì^j JuvaL
t Oidi
j! ilgiJusi J-«—io Lc.j Í4_¿1¿j^1 JUÌJJ ÙÌ—^ J*)^ ¿^ üjjLáj^l iJLa - ^
ij^rj 2U!Jlx_vJ.l 3 i^L-dl jJû AISLOj <_£jJl JjJ^dJ 2_¡iijd! SJIÄ^^I JÜ?JJ
JjL^y ÍjkÀJl »1 «¿Ài!
y-* jyJÍL*. J-iî ijJ_>- (3 Subtil 9j!j.J-1 'JÍ-» ^Làjjl ^^Jp Í-LÍJ^! (!)
^ -,-•>•»- S^! ^Ji i J g jri J»J 4-;p! ; y ?li 4_Jli- I J—JÎ L» ob <j j-JU
J_J L^ o b < 3 j -ì Mj , o jjLä^j ^ JU>- 3 ä j !I
<«JIJTJ ^Uil ys.li <-3di-li Ob UkJ-wvJ cÄ^pL^ai!
^jJlP SJJI_2]I jjjüj ^L-dl jycJ SjL^aJl ji-J^I äjJ-äi! yjyüj (<-rJ)
M (_5-1P tÄ_juiJjl oljL_P OI_JI*J! JL_JSJJj j-JJ J —^
'Äjjip^i ^lil
oLjbtJl 2 jLv^ ¿>bw> 3_Jlil oLäij_xi!
.^LI! (^^LP «j^lij 3ìJjJI oljlp
ÄS"y_OÌI o l i J L - ^: ^^G-ip (JLij^l li-JFC Ju^L.—— T
.4IJB>J.I XJBJJL I_3JJJÀJL Ì-J-S^ 3 "-3^ J^ OLJJJJ OILS' OLJ
-3-

--- Page 167 ---
¿yS¡\
T^^JRL (_RIP ¿LAÁÍIJ ¿LÁJJL OL_V¿> <J ¡L—L-TY 2_¡JS!! ¿>JAJ
t^bi ijjc] a j l i Ñb ÁJLVÍJ yljudl j*JäJ ÄJJU APTJUJ
(Cj-^il J-®-*^ <_£j-SJJ JiLxJl Jj^xJl (J-jÂ^ áV&jVisA ¿ ç^aj
cLSJJLSM ÄJli^l ob^JjSU Uàj í2iíMJl cJdiiijJlj
¿Ü¿l Jljp ^SU y^i j jJUJJ iryJu^ J^VJuj ^Lli ùb yû
oL»ljJl l^-* J-^ L> yJ jj-^J (*j-^ '¿Lll ol$.i
2_JL¿1 OL*^STIJ 4-J ^Jj*_JÜI Jjj ...£>-J CÄÄ 3 J-J-íJ 'Ól (jJ-U4
IPL_S¿5 JÎ OJ-^JO ¿¿-^ À^L J AJSIP^I ^L^-J^I J <J \ ¿I=> J JJ GLI J
CJUsr^l ¿f\J 3bvaj^lj iljil ùi^-iJ Oy y- c <3
2_jLàJ_!l otjL¿ oUly-J ci.Lskxi'b/l j -ià-à>tj 01 yyL JJîj
câJUJ^I j tgJl jUll
YL^-J T O L L ¿L 1 GI LE. JIJ^J^I JVIIJL 2JU5F
J-G-É-4 (J>1 ^IJ ' -I olàUiJl <UP J^JIJ U yj JIJS^ ^yxJl
jJcó ¡JJ^SJÚ olys.r1\ ¿l¿! Alp dlbj c^oJ "ïL^bil aJlJL>Jl"
Ji jj jLJU^J ¿L¡PjJij jJLxilj -Lj^î Aj
ctili;^! Uuïs U»jLx; ¿Jl JjLJ.1 3 o l j ( J LP 0jUJlj ol>jl*il
Llàj .c2_ipUJl ol_gJr-l iJ¡Jb¿ij o b^ Â^jL-à^
t^Lii jJcò 3 cc-31 ^Sil y J^J jii
¿Jl tUJo-vJ.! J J ^ cr^1 ^^ ^^ ^J0^ Ai
t^-Lii jocJ (3 Ubi IJji çi-3^ JjOj 31 ji^S/l 2^-Ulil OlolJl Ifjï
-2-

--- Page 168 ---
JUÎ!
^JL L_i L^Jj jUuil c^-Lil jou ¿Lio ajJÜS^I óJü>xxil j^S/l ÄJUJI 3 Iii^î VfcjypV
jiLyail \ v-i (»/ \ Jj-áil J-^ Liull J-*»-*-^ OL^p LS^2^- (V^ '^-5
IÄ YUP 4*JUJL 4JJ JÍ (J ÄJÄLIFTL (J ^S/L Y Y ¿FP
dJJi (J U. tLgj.sU:. bLiy-lj LILILÍ Jl L*—>3
• ÍJJ ULI F .3 "—IJ-I^ J-S" OLJ~LI SLPIJAJ OLJ ÄS'YJUIL OUJJ-VJ.LJ
44jiU>til ¡Lis JJI
bU—l i^-Uil j¡JJ ç^jJl ^Jiil JbJL^dJ j^iJJJJ J^zS Jl ÄÄ-Ü-I ¿j^ö j
cÄ^Lll JLJJJI OÍJUÍ! JL^Î Ji
U^w V _ j |I i-AJl ÙIJUU ¡LsUU jjàilJ oUrU-V ¿y
t (
cÄJUftl «ULP U JIj '¿bil jJci ÄjL¿JI jU^L; YU JJ LüJ äLIÄJI ¿iL"
ÜIjlLJI JJS/ UfbU jVlj SiJ^I oU-U^ftl VfcjUpN ¿ ^
ÍLGJJJJ J U>R JJJ^SSJL JJJ^OJJ J U-J I JS
SJUJXXII JOIJLJI J ÜL UAJJ JJ ¿LIL jJdj _/& y JI JM^S1! OÍ À S N^
C4J ^¿Jl^dj
5JS"}IP OJL'TJ <D ^JL^IJI CJUUPJ ^UIL AJLUIÍI C^LJYX-'IJ U ¿S
t^JLijl JLc- üUa-äJlj Ä/>lJjU~ll J| i_'o .,,-?;Il JyfijJL 2JLJ j

--- Page 171 ---
I hereby certify that the foregoing Je certifie que le texte qui precede
text is a true copy of the Paris est une co pie conforme de 1' Accord de
a
Agreement, done at Paris on Paris, fait Paris le 12 decembre 2015,
12 December 2015, the original of dont 1' original se trouve depose au pres
which is deposited with the Secretary du Secretaire general des Nations
General of the United Nations. Unies.
For the Secretary-General, Pour le Secretaire general,
Under-Secretary-General Le Secretaire general adjoint
for Legal Affairs and aux affaires juridiques et
United Nations Legal Counsel Conseiller juridique des Nations Unies
)J~~
Miguel de Serpa Soares
United Nations Organisation des Nations Unies
New York, 14 March 2016 New York, le 14 mars 2016